Title: VLN-AVP: Zero-Shot Vision-Language Navigation with Hybrid Long-Short-Term Memory for Autonomous Valet Parking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.17767v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 01:43:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# VLN-AVP: Zero-Shot Vision-Language Navigation with Hybrid Long-Short-Term Memory for Autonomous Valet Parking 

Yijian Li 1, Xiangru Mu 1, Changze Li 1, Hantian Shi 1, Jiyuan Cai 2,Jia Cai 2, Xiaoxue Liu 2, Yajing Sun 2, Ming Yang 1, and Tong Qin 1

Abstract — Existing methods in Autonomous Valet Parking (AVP) typically rely on pre-built maps, which severely restricts their scalability to unseen environments and open-vocabulary targets. Inspired by the application of Vision-Language Mod-els (VLMs) in Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) tasks, we propose VLN-AVP, a zero-shot navigation framework for AVP tasks. By combining the precise spatial perception of a Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) model with the general intelligence of VLMs, our framework 1) eliminates the dependency on pre-built maps, 2) interprets semantic environmental contexts in parking scenarios, and 3) enables intuitive navigation following natural language instructions. Specifically, we introduce a hybrid mem-ory system: a short-term perception memory tracks semantic visual cues to address the limitations of VLM’s single-frame reasoning in existing methods, while a long-term topological memory facilitates stable policy learning from past experiences. To bridge the gap in existing benchmarks, we also present the VLN-AVP dataset and benchmark. Featuring 10 high-fidelity parking scenes and over 1,000 navigation episodes, it has the largest number of garage scenes to date and is the first VLN benchmark for underground parking. Extensive experiments demonstrate that in simulation, our method achieves an over 25% improvement in success rate compared to VLN methods and an over 15% improvement compared to other autonomous driving methods. Furthermore, it attains a leading success rate in real-world vehicle experiments, proving its practical feasibility. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

As a critical component of intelligent transportation systems, Autonomous Valet Parking (AVP) integrates au-tonomous driving technologies such as perception, local-ization, and trajectory planning, significantly improving the efficiency and user experience of parking. Current AVP methodologies [1], [2] usually rely on pre-built maps, such as high-definition (HD) or vectorized maps [2], [3]. These maps require pre-collected environmental data to construct scene representations of parking garages before performing parking tasks in corresponding scenarios, which constrains the operational flexibility and environmental adaptability of AVP systems. In addition, due to the lack of human-machine interaction capabilities, current AVP systems are limited to performing predefined tasks, such as navigating to a designated parking slot. 

> 1

Yijian Li, Xiangru Mu, Changze Li, Hantian Shi, Ming Yang, and Tong Qin are with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 

> 2

Jiyuan Cai, Jia Cai, Xiaoxue Liu, and Yajing Sun are with Yinwang Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd. Tong Qin is the corresponding author: qintong@sjtu.edu.cn .This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62403312). FRONT CAM     

> VLM
> Reasoning: recognized environmental context:
> “elevator” sign.
> Action: Turn right.
> Short-Term Memory
> Long-Term Memory
> User Instruction (Natural Language):
> Find a convenient spot near the elevator hall.
> Elevator
> Traditional AVP VLN-AVP
> Constraint:
> Operates on fixed, predefined tasks.
> User Instruction (Pre-defined):
> Park in slot #31.

Fig. 1. Traditional AVP systems require pre-built high-definition (HD) maps and are limited to pre-defined tasks. In contrast, VLN-AVP is capable of comprehending semantic cues in the surrounding environment and mak-ing driving decisions by a VLM-based navigation framework. Interpreting the human instructions, the system can find the way to the demanded parking space near the elevator. 

They cannot handle more complex instructions like “navi-gate to the exit” or “park near the elevator lobby”. To perform more flexible and intelligent AVP tasks, the AVP system must (1) comprehend natural language instructions, (2) interpret semantic environmental contexts, and (3) operate indepen-dently without pre-built maps. Recent studies in Autonomous Driving (AD) [4], [5], [6], [7] have explored employing Vision Language Models (VLMs) to enhance autonomous driving performance by fine-tuning or zero-shot methods. However, both approaches face significant challenges when applied to AVP tasks. This is because these methods are designed primarily for high-speed driving on open roads, making it difficult to generalize them directly to the complex, enclosed environments of underground parking garages. Meanwhile, the successful application of zero-shot VLMs in Vision Language Navigation (VLN) [8] inspires us to apply VLMs to AVP tasks. VLN requires VLM-powered agents to comprehend natural language instructions and nav-igate to targets in unseen environments. The AVP scenario, with its low speed and enclosed environment, presents an ideal case for zero-shot VLM methodologies. Moreover, VLM can perceive critical environmental cues in parking lots, such as signs and ground markings, and subsequently make autonomous-cruising decisions based on these scene descriptions. Therefore, leveraging the strong capabilities of VLMs, AVP can be achieved in previously unseen parking scenarios, eliminating the reliance on prior environmental knowledge, such as pre-built maps. arXiv:2607.17767v1 [cs.RO] 20 Jul 2026 In this work, we propose VLN-AVP, a zero-shot vision-language navigation framework for AVP. Our approach com-bines the precise spatial perception of the Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) representation with the general reasoning capabilities of VLMs. To ensure stable and efficient navigation, we introduce a hybrid memory system: (1) a short-term per-ception memory that tracks semantic visual cues to augment the VLM’s immediate decision-making, and (2) a long-term topological memory that facilitates stable policy learning by integrating past experiences. As shown in Figure 1, the incor-poration of VLMs allows the AVP system to interpret diverse natural language instructions, utilize semantic environmental context, and operate independently of pre-built maps. We also propose an underground parking dataset and benchmark to compensate for the lack of existing benchmarks. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments in both high-fidelity sim-ulation and real-world parking scenarios, demonstrating that our framework significantly outperforms existing VLN and autonomous driving methods in both navigation success and efficiency. The contributions of this work include:  

> •

We propose VLN-AVP, a zero-shot vision-language navigation framework for AVP. Compared to traditional methods, it requires no pre-built map, interprets seman-tic visual contexts in parking scenarios, and enables intuitive navigation using natural-language instructions.  

> •

We introduce a hybrid memory architecture. A short-term memory augments VLM’s decision-making by re-taining semantic visual cues, resolving the instability of VLM’s single-frame decision-making in existing meth-ods. A long-term topological memory facilitates stable policy learning through past experiences, improving efficiency and stability compared to other approaches.  

> •

We construct the VLN-AVP dataset and benchmark. Featuring 10 high-fidelity parking scenes and over 1,000 navigation episodes, it has the largest number of garage scenes to date and is the first VLN benchmark for underground parking.  

> •

Extensive experiments conducted on both simulators and real-world vehicles proved the outstanding perfor-mance of our method compared to existing approaches. II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Methods for Autonomous Valet Parking 

Early works on AVP [1], [9] primarily focused on build-ing a complete system to conduct real-world experiments, thereby proving the feasibility of the overall method. Re-cently, more and more research has focused on a specific part of the AVP system, especially on mapping and lo-calization methods. Semantic SLAM-based approaches [2], [3], [10] used robust semantic features segmented from the inverse perspective mapping (IPM) image to build maps of underground parking slots. AVP-loc [11] proposed anovel data association method to find the relation between current observations and the vectorized HD map, enabling stable localization performance in the underground parking scenarios. To sum up, current AVP algorithms heavily rely on pre-built maps, whereas our approach is designed to eliminate this dependency. 

B. Vision Language Navigation 

In vision-language navigation (VLN), an agent follows human instructions to navigate in previously unseen environ-ments [8]. Nowadays, VLN methods primarily encompass two methodological paradigms: training-based approaches [12], [13], [14] and zero-shot approaches [15], [16], [17]. Some methods [13], [14] leverage the capabilities of VLMs and fine-tune selected layers’ parameters to adapt to navi-gation tasks. Benefiting from the enhanced performance of large language models (LLMs) and VLMs, zero-shot VLN approaches [15], [16] have also achieved excellent perfor-mance across diverse scenarios. Specifically, ReasonNav [18] proposed integrating detection models with VLMs to identify environmental signage and other information. However, as there are fundamental differences in opera-tional scenarios, navigation rules, and control methodologies between mobile robots and AVP, VLN approaches face a large gap in AVP applications. We therefore propose avision-language navigation framework specifically designed for AVP, enabling autonomous navigation from human in-structions across diverse parking environments. 

C. Vision Language Model for Autonomous Driving 

With the enhanced performance of VLM, VLM-based autonomous driving methods have been widely studied to address corner cases that remained in traditional approaches. Recent works [4], [19], [20], [21] leveraged LLM or VLM as the backbone of an end-to-end network and performed fine-tuning on large-scale datasets. However, data-driven approaches often entail prohibitive training costs and still struggle to generalize across diverse, unstructured scenarios. Other works [22], [23], [6], [7] relied on VLMs to perform zero-shot decision-making during autonomous driving. These methods also face generalization challenges in underground parking scenes and usually cannot be applied directly to closed-loop tests or real vehicles. In summary, while current VLM-based systems either suffer from high training costs or lack the robustness re-quired for zero-shot deployment in parking environments, our VLN-AVP aims to bridge this gap. It provides a zero-shot framework that achieves reliable closed-loop navigation in unstructured parking scenarios. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

We propose VLN-AVP, a zero-shot vision-language navi-gation approach for autonomous valet parking. As depicted in Figure 2, the system comprises four core components: (1) a high-frequency, low-level module for spatial awareness and candidate trajectory generation, (2) a high-level, low-frequency decision core powered by VLM, (3) a hybrid long-short-term memory module, comprising a short-term memory which augments VLM’s decision-making by re-taining semantic visual cues, and a long-term topological Multiview Images User Instruction:     

> Find a parking space with electric vehicle charger.
> Odometry User Feedback
> Object Detection Short-Term Memory
> Memorize
> BEV Perception
> Refinement Candidat eTrajectories Target Extractor Memory Context
> Elevator Exit Area B EV Parking Space
> Long-Term Memory History Reference Action Decision Hierarchical Decision-Making Module Final Action & Trajectory
> Controller
> Update Update Query Provides Semantic Cues

Fig. 2. The structure of VLN-AVP. The orange block updates at high frequency to provide low-level BEV perception and candidate trajectories. The blue block is the VLM core, which performs high-level, low-frequency decision-making based on current observation, short-term memory, and human instructions. The green blocks are the long-short-term memory modules. Finally, the hierarchical decision-making module bridges all other modules and chooses the most appropriate trajectory. TABLE I COMPARISON OF EXISTING METHODS AND VLN-AVP          

> Method type and representative works Fits underground parking scenarios Generates drivable trajectories Open-target navigation AVP Methods [1], [2]
> ✓✓×
> VLN Methods [16], [18]
> ××✓
> VLM-based AD Methods [6], [7]
> ×✓✓
> VLN-AVP (Ours) ✓✓✓

memory which facilitates stable policy learning through past experiences, and (4) a hierarchical decision-making module that bridges the high and low frequency modules, and makes the final driving decisions. 

A. BEV Perception and Candidate Trajectory Generation 

The foundation of our system is its ability to perceive the local environment without relying on pre-built HD maps. We employ MapTR [24], a transformer-based BEV perception model, to obtain low-level road structures at a high frequency. It processes synchronized images from four surround-view cameras mounted on the vehicle It =

{Ifront  

> t

, I rear  

> t

, I left  

> t

, I right  

> t

} and then directly outputs vectorized representations of key map elements in the BEV space. For the AVP task, we primarily focus on its prediction of lane centerlines, Lt = MapTR (It).These raw predictions of centerlines are then passed to a trajectory optimizer, which combines them with RS curves [25] and the vehicle’s kinematics model, and generates a set of drivable trajectories T :

Tt = foptim (Lt) = {τi}Nt

> i=1

, (1) where Nt is the number of candidate trajectories at time t.Each τi is formally defined as an ordered sequence composed of M two-dimensional waypoints in the BEV coordinates: 

τi = {pj }Mj=1 , where pj ∈ R2. (2) Each trajectory τi represents a potential path for the vehicle, such as continuing straight, turning left, or turning right at a junction. This set T serves as the action space for the downstream controller of the vehicle. 

B. Detection and Short-Term Memory 

Many methods [6], [16], [18] have employed VLMs to perform high-level driving or navigation decisions, but they typically rely on single-frame image or text as input, which has several limitations: (1) VLM usually runs at a low frequency, so it’s very possible to miss some critical visual information, such as a sign that appears only for a short time. (2) VLMs cannot have a space-time perception of the environment with a single image. To address these limitations, we employ Grounding DINO [26], a high-frequency object detection module, to capture visual navigation cues from Ifront  

> t

. Then, we design a short-term memory (STM) module to retain these perceptions and compensate for the low-frequency of VLM. In the AVP scenario, we use “sign” as the prompt for detection, as signs are the main source of navigation information. Each detection result Bdetect = DINO (Ifront  

> t

) is represented as an image with bounding boxes, and together with its timestamp t, bounding boxes B and the vehicle’s yaw angle θ, we form a frame of the STM m = ( Idetect , B, t, θ ). The STM is a KSTM -frame queue, denoted as STM = {mj }KSTM  

> j=1

. When a new frame 

mnew is added to the STM, 3 filtering steps are performed to remove frames that are no longer necessary: Elevator 

> EV Charger
> Area B
> Exit
> Area A
> Elevator to Building 7
> Junction Nodes
> Landmark Nodes (Valid)
> Landmark Nodes (Invalid)

Fig. 3. Visualized LTM on a simulated scene after 10 navigation episodes.  

> •

Object Filter: Try to match mnew with other frames in STM by IoU-based object tracking. Replace old frames with the same object(s) in mnew . This step eliminates redundant frames of the same objects caused by the high-frequency detection.  

> •

Directional Filter: Remove frames with significantly different yaw angles from the current vehicle pose, i.e., 

|θnew − θold | > ∆θmax . This step ensures that the sign directions in the STM are consistent with the current vehicle pose.  

> •

Temporal Filter: Remove frames that are too old, i.e., 

tnew −told > ∆tmax . If the queue is still full, the oldest frame is removed. 

C. High-level Decision-making by Vision-Language Model 

To enhance our system with semantic understanding and zero-shot generalization capabilities, we leverage the power of large-scale VLMs. When a user issues a natural language command, such as “park near the elevator entrance of level B2”. A target extractor first decomposes this instruction into a sequence of actionable navigation sub-goals: 

G = fextract (Luser ) = ( g1, g 2, . . . , g Kg ). (3) Here, G is a sequence of length Kg , where each sub-goal 

gi is a noun describing a sub-goal in the overall instruction (e.g., “level B2” or “elevator entrance”). The core of the guidance system is the VLM module. At each decision step, the VLM receives a compound prompt 

P:

P = [ If ront ⊕ { Idetect,j }KSTM  

> j=1

⊕ S ⊕ g], (4) where If ront is the current forward-facing camera image, 

{Idetect,j }KSTM  

> j=1

is the collection of detection results in the STM, S is a system prompt defining the navigation task, and 

g is the current navigation sub-goal. The VLM then infers the appropriate high-level meta-action: 

avlm = VLM (P), (5) where avlm ∈ A = {forward, left, right, stop } is extracted from the VLM’s output. If avlm is the stop action, the navigation ends. Otherwise, avlm is cached in an action cache 

Acache in the hierarchical decision module, and later sent to the low-level controller. Use VLM Decision Query Long-Term Memory   

> Elevator Exit Area B EV Parking Space
> Topological Long-Term Memory
> Ego Position Candidate Trajectories
> Selected Trajectory Cache Decisions
> VLM Core
> Not Found Found Successfully Match with Trajectories Query Update
> Action Cache
> Short-Term Memory

Fig. 4. The framework of our proposed hierarchical decision-making module. Based on the long-term memory module and the VLM output, the candidate trajectory is selected in a hierarchical way. 

D. Long-Term Topological Memory 

VLMs and short-term memory work well in zero-shot scenarios, such as navigating a public garage for the first time. But for repeated tasks in the same garage (like daily commutes), it is more efficient to leverage the historical ex-perience of successful navigations. Therefore, we introduce a long-term topological memory (LTM). This topological graph gradually builds a sparse, stable representation of the environment from past experiences, compensating for the lack of a prebuilt map. Figure 3 shows an example of the LTM. 

Structure: The LTM is represented as a directed graph 

G = ( V, E), consisting of:  

> •

Junction Nodes: njunc ∈ V are defined as njunc =(pjunc , v ), where pjunc ∈ R2 is the coordinate of the road junction center and v ∈ { 0, 1} is a validity bit. When the system is at an unseen junction, it initializes a junction node and calculates pjunc from BEV perception.  

> •

Landmark Nodes: nlm ∈ V are defined as nlm =(plm , v ). It is recorded at task completion points when the system executes a ‘stop’ action.  

> •

Edges: e ∈ E are defined as e =(nsource , n destination , d, v ). It is established between nodes when the vehicle drives from one node nsource to another ndestination . The system will record the trajectory 

{pj }Mj=1 of length M chosen at nsource . Then the direction vector of the edge d ∈ R2 is calculated by the following equation: 

d = pM − pM −4

∥pM − pM −4∥2

. (6) This vector uses the 5th-to-last point to the final point to represent the direction of the edge. Storing a direction vector instead of a relative command (‘left’ / ‘right’) makes the memory robust to the vehicle’s different approach angles. 

Memory Updating: After each navigation episode, node and edge validity bits v ∈ { 0, 1} are updated based on user feedback:  

> •

Navigation Success: All traversed nodes and edges are set to v = 1 .① ② ③ ④ ⑤⑥ ⑦ ⑧ ⑨ ⑩Fig. 5. 10 scenes in the VLN-AVP dataset. Top row: 3DGS renderings of 5 scenes; Bottom row: Top-down views of the remaining 5 scenes.  

> •

Navigation Failure/Continuation: If the user indicates the navigation is unsuccessful when the vehicle stops, the landmark node is set to v = 0 . Upon the user’s request, the system may continue the navigation.  

> •

System Triggered Failure: If the system follows the LTM memory but cannot find a valid trajectory, it implies there has been environment changes. In this case, no landmark node will be generated, and the validity bits of the edges leading to the failure will be set to 0. If in later episodes the edge recovers and is traversed, its validity bit will be set to 1. 

E. Hierarchical Decision-Making Module 

The hierarchical decision-making process (Figure 4) intel-ligently balances long-term experience and short-term VLM guidance. When there is only one candidate trajectory, the system directly executes it and keeps updating T . When the vehicle arrives at a decision point, such as a junction (i.e., 

|T | ≥ 2): 1) Query Long-Term Memory: If a valid landmark node that matches the current target exists, the system uses graph search to find a path {e1, e 2, . . . , e n} to the target node. If successful, a direction vector pi is calculated for each current candidate trajectory by Eq. (6). The system then identifies the candidate trajectory 

τi∗ with pi∗ that maximizes its cosine similarity with the direction vector of e1 and satisfies the similarity threshold θthreshold . If i∗ is found, the system selects the trajectory τi∗ for execution. 2) Query Cached VLM Decision: During navigation, the decision module keeps querying the VLM according to Eq. (4) and updating the action cache Acache . If no valid long-term memory is available for guidance, the system relies on the VLM’s judgment by selecting the latest action in Acache . The action is mapped to the most suitable τi∗ based on angular deviation. This cache design decouples low-frequency VLM in-ference from the trajectory selection process, reducing decision-making latency. 3) Execution: The selected trajectory τi∗ is passed to the low-level vehicle controller for smooth execution. After the execution of τi∗ , the system updates T and repeats the decision-making process. In summary, the hierarchical strategy ensures efficiency in familiar areas while leveraging the VLM’s zero-shot                       

> TABLE II COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT UNDERGROUND PARKING DATASETS
> Dataset Number of Garages Render Method VLN Episodes SUPS [28] 1Unity ×
> SUSTech-COE [29] 1Unreal ×
> GarageWorld [30] 83DGS ×
> GarageNet [31] 2Point Cloud ×
> VLN-AVP (Ours) 10 3DGS ✓

generalization for novel situations. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. VLN-AVP Dataset and Benchmark 

A significant challenge in AVP research is the lack of high-quality simulation datasets for underground parking scenarios. To address this, we constructed the VLN-AVP dataset and benchmark. 

1) Dataset Construction: We first used a handheld scan-ning device equipped with LiDAR and fisheye cameras to capture dense point cloud and image data from real-world underground parking garages. These datasets were then pro-cessed using 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [27] techniques to generate photorealistic, large-scale, and continuous 3D scenes (Figure 5). As shown in Table II, our dataset provides more diverse environments (10 garages) compared to previous works. More importantly, it is the first to provide specific VLN episodes in underground parking scenarios. 

2) Benchmark Construction: We also developed VLN-AVP Benchmark, a complete benchmark for evaluating VLN tasks in our dataset. It has over 1000 navigation episodes across all 10 scenes, each including natural-language navi-gation instructions, starting location, target location, and the ground-truth trajectory. We created 2 subsets according to task complexity:  

> •

VLN-AVP-Regular : Target is a single, common lo-cation, like “go to the exit” or “go to the elevator entrance”.  

> •

VLN-AVP-Challenging : Target may contain combi-nations of additional demands, like “find a parking space with electric vehicle charging port” or “go to the elevator nearest to building B”. 

B. Experiment Setup 1) Implementation Details: Our system utilizes the Gemini-3-flash model as the VLM for decision-making. The VLM: The pillar indicates I’m in section A. An overhead sign shows an arrow pointing left and characters that translate to "Exit". A green sign with ‘B’ is visible further down the left path. Action: Left         

> VLM: We are in Section B (indicated by the “B” on the pillars). An overhead sign indicates the door ahead is likely the exit. On the right side, there are several empty parking spaces visible. Crucially, there are no cars parked within them. Action: Stop
> VLM: The overhead sign in the middle clearly indicates that “Area B” and “Parking Spaces 01-23” are to the right. To find a parking place in Section B, I should follow this sign.
> Action: Right
> VLM: The pillars clearly indicate we are in Section B. On the left side, an overhead sign can be seen, suggesting a potential exit route from Section B.
> Action: Left
> Instruction: Find a parking place near the exit of section B, with no cars on either sides.

① ② ③ ④Fig. 6. A successful case study of our VLN-AVP system navigating a complex, multi-stage instruction in simulation. The left-most panel shows the global trajectory. The right panels show the front camera view at key decision points, along with the VLM’s reasoning. 

BEV perception module is built upon MapTR [24] to predict road structure. For our short-term memory, the cache size is set to KSTM = 6. In simulated experiments, we use a customized simulator built upon 3DGS [27]. Its design is based on the Real2Sim2Real simulator in REAP [32], with extensions for VLN task interfaces and realistic vehicle kinematics. Our method runs along with the simulation environment on a desktop with a single NVIDIA 4090 GPU. In real-world experiments, we deploy the system on a real vehicle equipped with an NVIDIA 2060 GPU. All experi-ments are conducted in continuous, real-time environments. 

2) Evaluation Metrics: We adopt standard metrics from VLN to quantitatively evaluate performance, including Suc-cess Rate (SR), Oracle Success Rate (OSR), Success weighted by Path Length (SPL) and Navigation Error (NE). An episode is considered successful if the agent stops within the bounding box of the target location or area. Simulated experiments are conducted on VLN-AVP-Regular and VLN-AVP-Challenging subsets. Real-world experiments are con-ducted on 30 navigation trials in 2 real underground parking garages. 

3) Baseline: To the best of our knowledge, no prior work has specifically addressed VLN in underground parking environments. So we compare our method against 2 relevant types of methods:  

> •

VLN Methods : Including two representative works in zero-shot VLN, MapGPT [16] and ReasonNav [18]. For MapGPT, we created an enhanced version, MapGPT w/ BEV, where waypoints are sampled along the refer-ence trajectories provided by the BEV perception mod-ule. ReasonNav is natively designed for all-directional movement, so we use the original method.  

> •

Autonomous Driving (AD) Methods : Including two representative VLM-based works in autonomous driv-ing, LaMPilot [6] and DiLu [7]. The same BEV percep-tion and other inputs are provided to these two methods. Besides, all methods use the same VLM core as VLN-AVP. By providing baselines with the same BEV understanding and other inputs as our method, we enable a fair compari-son of other components, such as decision-making and the memory module. 

TABLE III SIMULATION EXPERIMENT RESULTS 

Method SR (%) ↑ OSR (%) ↑ SPL (%) ↑ NE (m) ↓

Regular Tasks 

VLN Methods 

MapGPT [16] (ACL’24) 9.3 18.3 3.5 39.8 MapGPT w/ BEV 37.6 46.0 26.6 26.7 ReasonNav [18] (CoRL’25) 23.0 28.2 13.6 28.2 

AD Methods 

LaMPilot [6] (CVPR’24) 49.7 54.4 34.8 19.5 DiLu [7] (ICLR’24) 47.4 50.2 31.5 22.6 

VLN-AVP (Ours) 65.2 74.6 43.1 13.2 

Challenging Tasks 

VLN Methods 

MapGPT w/ BEV 19.3 26.0 14.8 31.8 ReasonNav [18] 17.6 22.7 10.7 34.5 

AD Methods 

LaMPilot [6] 33.6 40.3 24.7 27.8 DiLu [7] 30.2 41.1 23.5 29.2 

VLN-AVP (Ours) 45.4 59.7 33.2 18.4 

C. Results in Simulated Environments 

The quantitative results are summarized in Table III. Our VLN-AVP demonstrates a substantial improvement over all other baselines. We analyzed some key reasons for the per-formance gap. One primary reason is that our hybrid memory design is more reliable and efficient for AVP scenarios. In contrast, image-based memory in ReasonNav and text-based graph memory in MapGPT are less robust to the complex environments of parking lots in the long term, while few-shot learning methods in DiLu and LaMPilot are inefficient at providing VLM with the necessary information in the short term. In addition, VLN methods often make frequent U-turns, which are kinematically infeasible for a real-world vehicle. Our VLN-AVP, constrained by the kinematically-aware reference trajectories, naturally avoids this problem. To provide a more intuitive understanding of our system, we present a case study of a complex navigation task in Figure 6. This example demonstrates our method’s general-ization capabilities, which are unattainable by conventional AVP approaches. VLM: The sign “Elevator Hall” points to the right. The area to the right appears to be a pedestrian access point.             

> Action: Stop
> User: Not this elevator. Continue.
> VLM: The overhead sign indicates “Elevator Hall” with an arrow pointing straight ahead from the driver’s perspective. The road ahead is open and drivable.
> Action: Forward
> No Visible Sign →Check STM ↑
> VLM: No explicit signs visible in the current frame. However, The memory images contain a crucial elevator sign pointing forward. Action: Forward
> VLM: An overhead sign clearly indicates “Elevator Hall” with an arrow pointing to the left.
> Action: Left
> VLM: A sign that reads “Elevator Hall” points to the right. The area to the right appears to be a pedestrian entrance.
> Action: Stop User: Go to the elevator hall.

①②

① ② ③ ④ ⑤

> Memorized by STM

Fig. 7. A qualitative experiment on a real-world vehicle platform. The system initially navigates to an incorrect elevator hall but successfully corrects its path and reaches the final destination after receiving user feedback. The middle picture shows how the short-term memory helps the VLM when there’s no visual cue in the current frame. TABLE IV REAL -WORLD EXPERIMENT RESULTS 

Method SR (%) ↑ OSR (%) ↑

LaMPilot [6] 36.7 40.0 Ours (w/o LTM) 53.3 70.0 

Ours 63.3 73.3 

‘w/o LTM’ is without Long-Term Memory. 

TABLE V ABLATION STUDY OF THE MEMORY COMPONENTS 

Method SR (%) ↑ OSR (%) ↑ SPL (%) ↑ NE (m) ↓

Regular Tasks 

VLN-AVP 65.2 74.6 43.1 13.2 w/o LTM 56.8 70.4 36.5 15.6 w/o LTM & STM 42.2 49.3 30.9 23.2 

Challenging Tasks 

VLN-AVP 45.4 59.7 33.2 18.4 w/o LTM 38.7 52.9 28.5 24.1 w/o LTM & STM 31.1 39.5 22.6 29.9 

‘w/o LTM’ is without Long-Term Memory; ‘w/o LTM & STM’ is without Long- or Short-Term Memory. 

D. Results in Real-world Environments 

We also deployed our VLN-AVP on a real-world vehicle platform. As VLN methods are not kinematically feasible on real vehicles, we compare with LaMPilot [6]. Although real-world experiments contain fewer episodes, which diminishes the advantage of long-term memory, our method still outper-forms the baseline, demonstrating robust zero-shot capability. Figure 7 illustrates a representative case study. Two el-evators exist in the scene, while only one is the intended target of the user. VLN-AVP stops at the unwanted one first and continues to navigate to the correct one on request by the user’s feedback. This capability for human-machine interaction enables error correction based on human feed-back, which is also essential for real-world applications. The middle picture also shows how the short-term memory helps the VLM when there’s no visual cue in the current frame. 

E. Ablation Studies 

To validate the performance of our proposed memory components, we conducted a series of ablation studies. 

Fig. 8. Performance comparison over 50 navigation attempts on one scene. TABLE VI LONG -T ERM MEMORY AND COST 

Method VLM Calls Avg. Time (sec) Cost ($) VLN-AVP (w/o LTM) 1403 262.7 1.06 VLN-AVP 317 161.7 0.24 

‘w/o LTM’ is without Long-Term Memory. ‘VLM Calls’ is the total number of VLM calls made in 10 episodes; ‘Avg. Time’ is the average navigation time per episode; ‘Cost’ is total cost of API service in USD. 

1) Impact of Long-Short-Term Memory: We evaluated two variants of our system: one without the long-term memory (w/o LTM), and one without either the long-term or short-term memory (w/o LTM & STM). The results are presented in Table V. The data shows that each memory component contributes positively to the overall performance. 

2) Learning Ability of Long-Term Memory: To further investigate the long-term memory, we evaluated the system’s performance over 50 navigation attempts in one scene. As illustrated in Figure 8, the full VLN-AVP system exhibits a steady increase in both SR and the SR/OSR ratio. The rising SR demonstrates the system’s ability to learn from past successful trials. More importantly, the increasing SR/OSR ratio indicates that the agent gradually learns to stop at the precise location, thanks to the updates of landmark nodes in the topological map. In contrast, the variant without long-term memory shows no clear learning trend. 

3) Long-Term Memory and Cost: To further understand the effect of long-term memory, we compare our full method TABLE VII SHORT -T ERM MEMORY AND DECISION -MAKING 

Method Identification Rate (%) SR (%) VLN-AVP (w/o STM) 57.7 60 VLN-AVP 84.6 85 

‘w/o STM’ is without Short-Term Memory. 

with the one without long-term memory in terms of the total number of VLM calls, average navigation time per episode, and total API service cost over 10 episodes. The results in Table VI demonstrate that the long-term memory significantly reduces both the computational overhead and the financial cost. By retrieving navigation knowledge from the topological map, the system avoids redundant VLM reasoning in previously visited areas, resulting in fewer API calls and improved navigation efficiency. 

4) Short-Term Memory and Decision-making: To further analyze how short-term memory (STM) augments the VLM’s decision-making, we selected 20 critical road junctions and compared the VLM’s identification rate of critical semantic cues and the success rate in making the right decision between our full method and the one without STM. The results indicate that STM significantly improves the iden-tification rate of semantic visual cues, especially signs. By maintaining a cache of recent observations, STM ensures that the navigation cues and logic remain consistent even when direct visual evidence is temporarily missing in the current frame. V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we introduced VLN-AVP, a zero-shot vision-language navigation framework designed for autonomous valet parking in unknown, map-free environments. By em-ploying VLM as the decision core, we equipped AVP systems with semantic navigation capabilities that exceed previous approaches. Additionally, we proposed a hybrid long-short-term memory system that addresses the limitations of tradi-tional single-frame decision-making and enables our system to learn from past experiences. We also constructed the largest underground garage dataset to date and the first VLN benchmark for underground parking. Extensive experiments in simulations and real-world settings demonstrated that our method outperforms existing methods in terms of feasibil-ity and effectiveness. Future work will explore additional training to address the VLM’s limitations in directional and spatial reasoning, and we plan to further improve and publicly release the VLN-AVP dataset. REFERENCES [1] M. Chirca et al. , “Autonomous valet parking system architecture,” in 

ITSC , 2015, pp. 2619–2624. [2] T. Qin et al. , “Avp-slam: Semantic visual mapping and localization for autonomous vehicles in the parking lot,” in IROS , 2020, pp. 5939– 5945. [3] M. Liu et al. , “Less-map: Lightweight and evolving semantic map in parking lots for long-term self-localization,” in ICRA , 2024, pp. 17 990–17 996. [4] X. Tian et al. , “Drivevlm: The convergence of autonomous driving and large vision-language models,” arXiv:2402.12289 , 2024. [5] C. Sima et al. , “Drivelm: Driving with graph visual question answer-ing,” in ECCV , 2024, pp. 256–274. [6] Y. Ma et al. , “Lampilot: An open benchmark dataset for autonomous driving with language model programs,” in CVPR , 2024, pp. 15 141– 15 151. [7] L. Wen et al. , “Dilu: A knowledge-driven approach to autonomous driving with large language models,” in ICLR , 2024. [8] J. Gu et al. , “Vision-and-language navigation: A survey of tasks, methods, and future directions,” ACL , pp. 7606–7623, 2022. [9] U. Schwesinger et al. , “Automated valet parking and charging for e-mobility,” in IV , 2016, pp. 157–164. [10] X. Mu et al. , “Inverse perspective mapping-based neural occupancy grid map for visual parking,” in ICRA , 2023, pp. 8400–8406. [11] C. Zhang et al. , “Avp-loc: Surround view localization and relocaliza-tion based on hd vector map for automated valet parking,” in IROS ,2021, pp. 5552–5559. [12] S. Chen et al. , “Think global, act local: Dual-scale graph transformer for vision-and-language navigation,” in CVPR , 2022, pp. 16 537– 16 547. [13] J. Zhang et al. , “Navid: Video-based vlm plans the next step for vision-and-language navigation,” in RSS , 2024. [14] A. Cheng et al. , “Navila: Legged robot vision-language-action model for navigation,” in RSS , 2025. [15] G. Zhou et al. , “Navgpt: Explicit reasoning in vision-and-language navigation with large language models,” in AAAI , 2024, pp. 7641– 7649. [16] J. Chen et al. , “Mapgpt: Map-guided prompting with adaptive path planning for vision-and-language navigation,” in ACL , 2024, pp. 9796– 9810. [17] M. Zhang et al. , “Apexnav: An adaptive exploration strategy for zero-shot object navigation with target-centric semantic fusion,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [18] B. Chandaka et al. , “Human-like navigation in a world built for humans,” in CoRL , 2025. [19] J. Mao et al. , “Gpt-driver: Learning to drive with gpt,” 

arXiv:2310.01415 , 2023. [20] Z. Xu et al. , “Drivegpt4: Interpretable end-to-end autonomous driving via large language model,” RA-L , 2024. [21] H. Fu et al. , “Orion: A holistic end-to-end autonomous driving framework by vision-language instructed action generation,” in ICCV ,2025, pp. 24 823–24 834. [22] Z. Qiao et al. , “Lightemma: Lightweight end-to-end multimodal model for autonomous driving,” arXiv:2505.00284 , 2025. [23] D. Fu et al. , “Drive like a human: Rethinking autonomous driving with large language models,” in WACVW , 2024, pp. 910–919. [24] B. Liao et al. , “Maptr: Structured modeling and learning for online vectorized hd map construction,” in ICLR , 2023. [25] J. Reeds and L. Shepp, “Optimal paths for a car that goes both forwards and backwards,” Pacific journal of mathematics , vol. 145, no. 2, pp. 367–393, 1990. [26] S. Liu et al. , “Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection,” in ECCV , 2024, pp. 38–55. [27] B. Kerbl et al. , “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.” ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1–14, 2023, art. no. 139. [28] J. Hou et al. , “Sups: A simulated underground parking scenario dataset for autonomous driving,” in ITSC , 2022, pp. 2265–2271. [29] S. Wang, “Development of occupancy prediction algorithm for under-ground parking lots,” arXiv:2409.00923 , 2024. [30] J. Cui et al. , “Letsgo: Large-scale garage modeling and rendering via lidar-assisted gaussian primitives,” ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1–18, 2024. [31] H. Yue et al. , “A point cloud dataset and deep learning method for semantic segmentation of underground garages,” CACAIE , vol. 40, no. 23, pp. 3726–3749, 2025. [32] C. Li et al. , “Reap: Reinforcement-learning end-to-end autonomous parking with gaussian splatting simulator for real2sim2real transfer,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.08713 , 2026.