TIC-VLA: A Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model
for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Zhiyu Huang * 1 Yun Zhang * 1 Johnson Liu 1 Rui Song 1 Chen Tang 1 Jiaqi Ma 1
Abstract
Robots in dynamic, human-centric environments
must follow language instructions while maintain-
ing real-time reactive control. Vision-language-
action (VLA) models offer a promising frame-
work, but they assume temporally aligned reason-
ing and control, despite semantic inference be-
ing inherently delayed relative to real-time action.
We introduce Think-in-Control (TIC)-VLA, a
latency-aware framework that explicitly models
delayed semantic reasoning during action gen-
eration. TIC-VLA defines a delayed semantic-
control interface that conditions action genera-
tion on delayed vision-language semantic states
and explicit latency metadata, in addition to cur-
rent observations, enabling policies to compen-
sate for asynchronous reasoning. We further pro-
pose a latency-consistent training pipeline that
injects reasoning inference delays during imita-
tion learning and online reinforcement learning,
aligning training with asynchronous deployment.
To support realistic evaluation, we present Dy-
naNav, a physics-accurate, photo-realistic sim-
ulation suite for language-guided navigation in
dynamic environments. Extensive experiments
in simulation and on a real robot show that TIC-
VLA consistently outperforms prior VLA models
while maintaining robust real-time control under
multi-second reasoning latency. Project website:
https://ucla-mobility.github.io/TIC-VLA/
1. Introduction
Robots operating in real-world, human-centric environments
must react to dynamic scenes while following high-level
natural language instructions (Chen et al., 2025b). Vision-
*Equal contribution
1University of California, Los Angeles.
Correspondence to: Zhiyu Huang <zhiyuh@ucla.edu>, Yun
Zhang <yun666@ucla.edu>, Jiaqi Ma <jiaqima@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026
by the author(s).
Real-world Testing
DynaNav Simulation
Go straight to enter Aisle 6, 
passing the yellow forklift to 
reach the end of the aisle.
I recognize the 
gray library building 
across the street …
I am on the floor of a 
warehouse and the 
position of the aisle is 
on my right …
Think-in-Control VLA 
Delayed Semantic-Control Interface
Vision
Lang.
Action
Think
Control
Time
Delayed 
Semantic States
I am in an open paved area 
and move forward across 
the plaza …
I am in a hallway with 
a path ahead and 
obstacles placed 
along the sides …
Move toward the 
nearby vending 
machine.
Go to the gray 
library building 
across the street 
and stop next to 
the sign wall.
Go along the hallway and 
turn left at the corner.
Latency 
Metadata
Latency-Consistent Training
Imitation Learning
RL Adaptation
Reasoning  Latency
Inject
Initialize
Figure 1. TIC-VLA enables real-time, language-conditioned nav-
igation by decoupling slow vision-language reasoning from fast
reactive control via a delayed semantic-control interface. A latency-
consistent training strategy improves robustness under variable
reasoning delays. Performance is demonstrated in the DynaNav
simulation and real-world indoor and outdoor navigation tasks.
language-action (VLA) models (Hirose et al., 2025; Xu
et al., 2024; Driess et al., 2026) have emerged as a promis-
ing paradigm by unifying perception, language understand-
ing, and control within a single learning-based system. By
incorporating large vision-language models (VLMs), these
approaches enable semantic grounding, task reasoning, and
instruction following (Zhou et al., 2026; Choi et al., 2024;
Zhao et al., 2025; Lin et al., 2025; Chandaka et al., 2025;
Castro et al., 2025). However, existing VLA systems rely on
a hidden and impractical assumption: reasoning and control
are temporally aligned. Vision-language reasoning is pro-
duced intermittently and often with substantial delay, while
control must operate continuously as the robot moves and
the environment changes. As a result, semantic represen-
tations frequently correspond to past world states, yet are
consumed by the policy as if they were current, introducing
systematic misalignment between thinking and control. This
temporal mismatch is particularly pronounced on mobile
1
arXiv:2602.02459v2  [cs.RO]  29 May 2026


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
robots with limited computation, where VLM inference can
take seconds while control loops run at tens of hertz.
Most prior work on embodied navigation sidesteps this is-
sue. Classical vision-language navigation (VLN) abstracts
navigation into discrete viewpoint transitions, ignoring em-
bodiment, dynamics, and timing (Krantz et al., 2020; Yu
et al., 2026; Raychaudhuri & Chang, 2025; Zeng et al.,
2025; Eftekhar et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2025a). Recent VLA
systems rely on powerful computers and often pause execu-
tion during reasoning inference (Zhang et al., 2024b; Cheng
et al., 2024), which is impractical in dynamic environments.
Dual-system and asynchronous VLA architectures decou-
ple high-level reasoning from low-level control (Wei et al.,
2025a; InternRobotics, 2025), but still assume that semantic
outputs are temporally fresh, implicitly treating inference
latency as negligible. We argue that latency in reasoning is
not merely an engineering inefficiency but a fundamental
modeling problem. When semantic information is delayed,
it may describe a past state of the robot and the environment,
rather than the current one. If this delay is not represented
or considered during policy learning, policies trained un-
der idealized synchronous supervision can degrade severely
when deployed under realistic inference latency.
To this end, we introduce Think-in-Control (TIC)-VLA, a
latency-aware framework that explicitly exposes inference
delay to the control policy. Rather than enforcing real-time
constraints on semantic reasoning, TIC-VLA defines a de-
layed semantic-control interface that allows reasoning to
proceed asynchronously while enabling robust real-time
control. Specifically, the reasoning module produces de-
layed latent semantic representations together with explicit
latency and ego-motion offset metadata, while the action
policy conditions on this delayed semantic-control interface.
This interface is the key distinction from prior asynchronous
or dual-system designs: instead of only separating slow
reasoning and fast control, TIC-VLA makes the tempo-
ral staleness of the semantic state an explicit input to the
controller. Importantly, architectural decoupling alone is
insufficient. Policies trained under idealized synchronous
supervision fail when deployed with delayed semantic in-
puts. We therefore propose a latency-consistent training
pipeline in which inference delays are explicitly injected
during imitation learning and reinforcement learning. This
training scheme aligns the policy’s training-time inputs with
the delayed semantic information it receives at deployment,
enabling robustness to variable reasoning latency rather than
assuming synchronous semantic supervision.
To support realistic and reproducible evaluation, we develop
DynaNav, a simulation suite featuring realistic rendering,
dynamic human agents, physics-based execution, and di-
verse indoor and outdoor scenarios. DynaNav supports
teleoperated data collection, online RL, and benchmarking.
Experiments in both simulation and real-world deployment
demonstrate that our proposed TIC-VLA model achieves
robust navigation under realistic inference latency. Figure 1
illustrates the key design of TIC-VLA and its performance
in simulation and real-world environments. The primary
contributions can be summarized as:
1. We introduce TIC-VLA with a delayed semantic-
control interface that provides the real-time action pol-
icy with delayed semantic features, latency metadata,
and ego-motion offsets.
2. We propose a latency-consistent training pipeline that
aligns learning with asynchronous inference at deploy-
ment, yielding robust navigation under variable delays.
3. We present DynaNav, a realistic simulation suite and
benchmark for language-guided navigation in dynamic
environments, and we demonstrate TIC-VLA’s strong
performance in simulation and in real-world settings.
2. Related Work
Learning-based Visual Navigation. Recent advances in
robot navigation have shifted from traditional map-based
pipelines toward end-to-end learning-based models. Diffu-
sion policies (Cai et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2025b), imitation
and reinforcement learning methods (Liu et al., 2025b; Wu
et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2025; He et al., 2025), and world
modeling approaches (Liu et al., 2025a; Bar et al., 2025)
have demonstrated strong performance in navigating com-
plex environments without relying on maps. The integration
of LLMs and VLMs into navigation tasks (Yuan et al., 2025;
Xu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025b; Gao et al., 2025; Zhou
et al., 2024) has further expanded robots’ semantic under-
standing and open-vocabulary reasoning capabilities, allow-
ing them to follow flexible natural language commands.
However, in most of these works, VLMs are employed as
auxiliary modules rather than being fully integrated into the
navigation pipeline. This limitation has motivated the devel-
opment of VLA models, which unify perception, instruction,
reasoning, and planning within a single framework.
VLA for Navigation. Recent studies increasingly employ
VLA models for robotic navigation (Du et al., 2025). Rep-
resentative methods span direct action prediction and in-
termediate planning: NaVid (Zhang et al., 2024b) predicts
next-step action from monocular RGB inputs, while NaV-
ILA (Cheng et al., 2024) generates mid-level linguistic ac-
tions executed by a visual locomotion policy. TrackVLA
(Wang et al., 2025b) combines language-based recognition
with diffusion-based trajectory planning. Several works
further explore generalist VLA frameworks: OmniVLA
(Hirose et al., 2025) supports multiple forms of instruction
conditioning, including egocentric poses, images, and natu-
ral language, while NavFoM (Zhang et al., 2025a) demon-
strates strong cross-embodiment performance. More recent
2


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
<think> I am on a sidewalk beside food trucks approaching the University 
Catholic Center facade. The critical agents are oncoming pedestrians ahead-
center. They are likely continuing toward me along the sidewalk. I have finished 
the left turn. I will keep right, yield as needed and continue straight. </think>
<answer> Waypoints: (2.94, -0.16, -0.08), (7.08, -0.27, -0.23), (11.05, -0.28, -
0.47) </answer>
-System: You are a 
<type> robot assigned 
to perform navigation 
tasks.
-Instruction: Turn left 
beside the orange 
trailer and continue 
along the sidewalk 
toward the University 
Catholic Center 
building.
-Historical trajectory: 
<waypoints>
-Task: Use reasoning 
to predict the future 
waypoints of the robot 
in the next 3, 6, and 9 
seconds in the format 
of (x, y, heading).
Ego-motion Offset 
(
)
Language Model Backbone
Transformer 
Action Expert
Fast
Slow
ViT Encoder
Tokenizer
Language Inputs
Text Tokens
Delayed Vision Inputs
Real-time Input
Mobile Robots
Wheeled
Legged
Action Query
DynaNav Env
PPO
LM
Action Expert
Value Net
Action
Reward
Visual
KV
Latency
Vision
RL Fine-tuning
Latency (   )
Reasoning Tokens
Robot State
Visual Tokens
KV
Action Expert
IL with Delayed Inference
Current t
Sampled
Time
KV
LM
LM inference on
observation at ssss
Policy predicts future
waypoints at 
Action (      
)
Low-level Control
Delayed
Semantic-Control
Interface
Figure 2. Overview of TIC-VLA. The architecture adopts a decoupled dual-system design with a fast action expert and a slow reasoning
VLM. A shared vision encoder provides real-time observations to the policy and time-lagged observations to the VLM, where the delay
arises naturally from slow inference. The delayed semantic-control interface (including delayed VLM KV cache features and latency
metadata) is explicitly recorded. The Transformer-based action expert takes as input the current observation, robot state, and delayed
semantic-control interface data to generate actions from learnable action queries via cross-attention. Multi-stage latency-consistent
training combines imitation learning with delayed inference and reinforcement learning to ensure robustness to realistic conditions.
systems address temporal reasoning and real-time execu-
tion, such as StreamVLN (Wei et al., 2025b), MobileVLA
(Huang et al., 2025), and dual-system VLA approaches like
DualVLN (Wei et al., 2025a), which balance deliberative
reasoning and reactive control via asynchronous inference.
Despite these advances, most existing VLA-based naviga-
tion models implicitly assume negligible inference latency,
often relying on powerful GPUs or blocking execution dur-
ing reasoning inference. In contrast, TIC-VLA is designed
for latency-aware execution and on-device deployment.
Navigation in Dynamic Environments. Another line of
work focuses on navigation in social and dynamic settings.
Social-LLaVA (Payandeh et al., 2025b) fine-tunes VLMs
for social navigation, while Narrate2Nav (Payandeh et al.,
2025a) incorporates implicit language reasoning, social
cues, and human intent into visual representations. Vi-
LAD (Elnoor et al., 2026) distills socially compliant naviga-
tion knowledge from large VLMs into lightweight policies
for real-time deployment. However, these methods typi-
cally rely on specialist policies at inference time and do
not keep an in-the-loop VLM during execution. Evaluation
is further limited by existing simulators. Arena (Shcher-
byna et al., 2025) and UrbanSim (Wu et al., 2025) support
dynamic agents but lack language-conditioned navigation.
SocialNav-SUB (Munje et al., 2025) evaluates real-world
social navigation without a controllable simulator, while
HA-VLN (Dong et al., 2025) relies on simplified observa-
tions and abstracted control. In contrast, DynaNav provides
a physics-accurate simulation suite for language-guided nav-
igation in human-centric environments.
3. Method
3.1. Problem Formulation
We consider an instruction-following navigation problem
in which an embodied agent must follow natural language
instructions to navigate dynamic environments. At each
control timestep t, the agent receives: (1) a natural lan-
guage instruction and context I, specifying the navigation
goal and historical trajectory; (2) an egocentric observa-
tion history Ot = {x0, . . . , xt}, consisting of RGB frames
xt ∈RH×W ×3; and (3) the robot state st ∈R3, encoding
ego-motion information such as linear velocity and angular
velocity. Conditioned on these inputs, the agent must out-
put an action at at each timestep to safely and efficiently
progress toward the goal. The environment evolves in re-
sponse to the agent’s actions, and the episode continues until
the agent reaches the goal or terminates.
We consider settings where a large-scale VLM is employed
to interpret the natural-language instructions and provide
semantic guidance. While such models are powerful, their
reasoning often introduces non-negligible inference latency
∆t. As a result, semantic outputs may become temporally
misaligned with the agent’s current observations and state,
creating a key challenge for real-time navigation.
3


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
3.2. Think-in-Control VLA
An overview of the TIC-VLA framework is shown in Fig-
ure 2. TIC-VLA adopts a dual-system execution paradigm
in which high-level semantic reasoning and low-level con-
trol operate asynchronously. Crucially, rather than treating
this as an architectural contribution, we explicitly model the
resulting inference delay as part of the control problem. The
key design principle is to expose reasoning latency to the
action policy and train the policy to act under delayed se-
mantic observations. We employ InternVL3-1B (Zhu et al.,
2025) as the vision-language backbone for semantic and
instruction understanding. At a high level, a VLM performs
semantic reasoning over delayed visual context and lan-
guage instructions, while a reactive action policy executes
at a high control frequency and never blocks on VLM infer-
ence. The action policy conditions on cached semantic rep-
resentations together with explicit latency and ego-motion
metadata, allowing it to interpret the delayed semantic infor-
mation in the correct temporal context. This latency-aware
semantic-control coupling enables robust navigation despite
asynchronous and delayed reasoning updates.
VLM Semantic Reasoning. We formalize inference la-
tency as a core variable in the system.
We define the
effective reasoning latency as ∆t = tinfer + telapse ≥0,
which accounts for both the VLM inference time (tinfer)
and the elapsed time since the last completed reasoning
update (telapse). At the current timestep t, the VLM oper-
ates on visual observations anchored at time t −∆t, rather
than the current frame. Given a set of historical frames
X vlm
t−∆t = {xt−∆t−δ | δ ∈{0, 3, 6, 9}}, the VLM per-
forms semantic reasoning conditioned on the instruction I.
The resulting output, denoted Rt−∆t, encodes high-level
scene understanding, critical object identification, intent pre-
diction, and future target waypoints derived from delayed
observations. The reasoning results, including predicted
waypoints, are generated relative to the time of inference
start t −∆t, rather than the current control timestep. This
explicit temporal anchoring allows the downstream policy to
know when the reasoning was produced, rather than treating
the reasoning results as instantaneous or noisy signals.
Latency-Aware Action Policy. The action policy πθ runs
at a high frequency and is responsible for real-time planning.
At each timestep t, it conditions on four categories of inputs:
(1) the current visual observation xt; (2) the current robot
state st; (3) the most recent semantic hidden state St−∆t pro-
duced by the VLM (i.e., the last-layer key-value cache); (4)
explicit latency metadata, including the effective latency ∆t
and the corresponding motion offsets ∆pt = (∆x, ∆y, ∆θ)
accumulated since reasoning generation. Providing both
delayed semantic states and latency metadata establishes a
delayed semantic-control interface: semantic features de-
scribe a past state of the world, while the control policy
is responsible for reinterpreting them in the current frame.
This allows the policy to reason consistently about delayed
semantics as the robot moves during inference. The policy
outputs a short horizon of future actions:
at = {a1
t, . . . , aT
t } = πθ
 St−∆t, xt, st, ∆t, ∆pt

,
(1)
where each ai
t ∈R3 represents a continuous action. The
action chunks are integrated into a short-horizon trajectory,
and a target point is chosen for execution.
As shown in Figure 3(a), the action policy utilizes a dedi-
cated action query token that attends to the scene context
through a stack of cross-attention Transformer layers. Vi-
sual tokens and VLM cache features are first projected into
a shared latent space via MLP layers, while the robot state
and latency metadata are encoded and added with positional
embeddings. These inputs are concatenated as key-value to-
kens, and the updated action query representation is passed
through an MLP to generate the action outputs.
Asynchronous Semantic Reasoning and Control. TIC-
VLA operates in a closed-loop asynchronous manner. The
VLM periodically updates semantic reasoning based on
delayed visual inputs, while the action policy continuously
executes without waiting for inference to complete. The
cached VLM hidden state is updated as follows:
(Scache
t
, Rcache
t
) =
(
(St, Rt), if inference finishes at t,
(Scache
t−, Rcache
t−), otherwise,
(2)
where t−denotes the most recent timestep prior to t at
which inference was completed. At every control timestep,
the action policy conditions on the most recent cached VLM
hidden state St−∆t = Scache
t
. In addition, by condition-
ing action generation on latency metadata and ego-motion,
TIC-VLA can reinterpret stale semantic information in the
current state. An illustration of the asynchronous inference
process is shown in Figure 3(d), and latency is measured as
the sum of two parts: VLM reasoning inference time and
the elapsed time since the last finished inference.
3.3. Latency-Consistent Training Pipeline
We adopt a three-stage training pipeline designed to enforce
latency consistency between training and deployment. An
overview of the pipeline is provided in Figure 3(c).
Supervised Fine-tuning of the VLM. We first fine-tune
the VLM on structured semantic reasoning data collected
from both simulation and real-world environments. Training
samples are automatically annotated using GPT-5. Given
past and future image sequences, the robot’s positional con-
text, and the corresponding trajectory, GPT-5 produces: (1)
a long-horizon instruction describing the navigation goal,
and (2) a concise, structured reasoning trace capturing criti-
cal object identification, intention prediction, and resulting
action. Details are provided in the supplementary material.
4


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
During this stage, the vision encoder is kept frozen. The
language model is trained to produce reasoning tokens and
waypoint predictions conditioned on visual tokens and in-
structions. We optimize the standard autoregressive cross-
entropy loss over the target token sequence:
Ll = −1
Nl
Nl
X
t=1
log pϕ(yt | y<t, I, V),
(3)
where yt denotes the t-th token in the target sequence,
Nl is the sequence length, and ϕ are the language model
parameters. We mix waypoint-only and scene-reasoning-
augmented targets during training for flexible prompting at
inference time.
Imitation Learning under Reasoning Latency. To com-
pensate for the uncertain delay in semantic reasoning, we
perturb originally aligned and synchronous demonstrations
to synthesize training data with delayed semantic reason-
ing. Specifically, we sample reasoning delays ∆t uniformly
from [0, 10] seconds and condition the policy on: (1) the
current image input and robot state, (2) KV cache features
from the delayed VLM reasoning output, (3) explicit latency
metadata. This exposes the policy to a range of temporally
misaligned semantic representations during training. The ac-
tion policy πθ is trained via imitation learning using human
demonstration trajectories. As low-level control actions
are not available, we integrate the predicted actions for-
ward to obtain positions (x, y, θ) over the prediction horizon
and compare them against ground-truth trajectories using a
smooth L1 loss:
La = 1
T
T
X
i=1
SmoothL1
 ˆp(i)
t
−p(i)
t

,
(4)
where ˆp(i)
t
is the predicted pose at sub-timestep i, and p(i)
t
is the ground-truth pose.
Reinforcement Learning with Asynchronous Guidance.
While imitation learning with synthesized reasoning delays
provides a strong initialization that accounts for inference
latency, the resulting training data distribution remains mis-
matched to the closed-loop distribution induced by coupled,
asynchronous reasoning-action interactions. Motivated by
prior work (Lu et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025; Chen et al.,
2025a), we fine-tune only the action policy using RL while
keeping the vision encoder and language model frozen. This
allows the policy to learn to interpret delayed VLM guid-
ance, handle dynamic agents, and mitigate variability intro-
duced by asynchronous inference.
We construct a simulation environment with dynamic human
agents and train the policy using Proximal Policy Optimiza-
tion (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). The value network,
shown in Figure 3(b), takes as input the current image to-
kens, the goal position, and the robot state, and outputs the
Pos. Embed
Q
Q
K,V
K,V
Concatenate
Transformer Action Expert
Action
Action Query
Layers
MLP
Value Network for Online RL
Visual Tokens
Conv 1D
MLP
MLP
Avg. Pooling
Concatenate
Value
State + 
Goal
MLP
MLP
(a)
(b)
+++
Asynchronous Inference in Closed-loop
Multi-stage Training
IL with Delayed Inference
VLM SFT
(d)
(c)
Online RL
Cross-Attention
Cross-Attention
VLM
VLM
VLM
Offline Data
Action
Action / Value
Env
Time
Time
Reasoning Inference
VLM receives 
observation xxx     
Inference Latency
VLM
Action
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
t
Visual Tokens
VLM KV Cache
Robot State
Latency Data
New Inference
Inference completes and 
returns hidden statesxxx
Elapse time
Action expert 
inference with xxxx
Inference time
Figure 3. Details of TIC-VLA action policy structure, training,
and asynchronous execution. (a) Latency-aware action policy that
predicts action chunks from multimodal inputs. (b) Value network
used during online reinforcement learning. (c) Three-stage latency-
consistent training pipeline combining VLM supervision, imitation
learning, and reinforcement learning. (d) Asynchronous inference
and control with explicit latency modeling.
estimated state value. The policy outputs a Gaussian action
distribution, where the action derived from the predicted
trajectory is the mean, and the standard deviation is learned
during training. The reward function is defined as:
rt = wgrgoal
t
+ wprprogress
t
+ wcrcollision
t
+ wsrspeed
t
,
(5)
where rgoal
t
rewards reaching the target, rprogress
t
encourages
progress toward the goal, rcollision
t
penalizes collisions with
humans or static obstacles, and rspeed
t
penalizes both exces-
sively slow motion and excessive speed. wg, wp, wc, and
ws are weights for these terms.
To further improve robustness under asynchronous deploy-
ment, we inject stochastic inference delays following each
VLM update to mimic the latency characteristics observed
on edge hardware. This enforces consistency between train-
5


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
ing and execution conditions. Additional implementation
details are provided in the supplementary material.
3.4. DynaNav
Evaluating our proposed latency-aware VLA framework
requires more realistic navigation benchmarks than classic
VLN benchmarks such as R2R (Li et al., 2019), VLN-CE
(Krantz et al., 2020), and RxR (Ku et al., 2020), which op-
erate in small indoor environments and abstract navigation
as viewpoint transitions without physical interaction. VLN-
PE (Wang et al., 2025a) and GRUtopia (Wang et al., 2024)
support embodied evaluation but do not model navigation
among dynamic human participants, while SocialHM3D
(Gong et al., 2025) and HA-VLN (Dong et al., 2025) in-
corporate human agents with limited visual realism. To fill
this gap, DynaNav provides a realistic benchmark integrat-
ing language-guided navigation, large-scale scenes, diverse
human agents, and physics-based robot control.
Simulation Environments. We construct simulation envi-
ronments in Isaac Sim (Isaac-sim development team, 2025),
with realistic, controllable dynamic interactions. Four rep-
resentative scenes (i.e., warehouse, hospital, office, and
outdoor sidewalk) are designed to capture a broad range of
navigation contexts. Human behaviors are modeled using
Isaac Sim’s built-in human simulation tools, supporting be-
haviorally plausible pedestrian movement. Our simulation
setup supports both wheeled (Nova Carter) and quadruped
(Boston Dynamics Spot) robots. We develop custom robot
behavior scripts that allow two modes of operation: (1) Hu-
man teleoperation mode, which enables manual control for
collecting expert demonstrations, and (2) End-to-end model
control mode, which allows direct control of the robot with
end-to-end planning models.
Designed for Scalable RL Training. We employ Isaac
Lab (Mittal et al., 2025) and leverage its GPU-accelerated
simulation to build environments for scalable reinforcement
learning training. We implement a custom human behavior
control script to generate human movements within the en-
vironment. Human-robot and robot-scene interactions are
fully physics-based with realistic contact dynamics. This
setup allows us to run multiple parallel environments, en-
abling scalable and efficient RL training.
Diverse Benchmark Tasks. We develop a comprehensive
benchmark of 85 test cases to evaluate navigation perfor-
mance across diverse conditions. Tasks vary along three
dimensions: (1) Crowd Density, ranging from empty spaces
to densely populated settings, capturing different levels of
dynamic complexity. (2) Navigation Distance, adjusted
from short-term navigation to long-horizon planning, re-
flecting increasing navigation difficulty. (3) Scene Type,
with evaluation conducted across four distinct environments
to assess robustness to varying spatial layouts and human
behaviors. For each task, standardized initial and goal posi-
tions are specified with a language instruction. Additional
details are provided in the supplementary material.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
Datasets. We train the model using three datasets featur-
ing dynamic human-robot interactions: (1) SCAND (Kar-
nan et al., 2022), which contains 8.7 hours of robot-driven
trajectories across diverse social environments; (2) GND
(Liang et al., 2025), which comprises over 11 hours of
recorded data collected in various campus environments; (3)
DynaNav simulation dataset, collected using our designed
dynamic simulation environments, containing 5.1 hours of
robot navigation data across multiple scene types.
Implementation Details. For VLM SFT, we employ full-
parameter training due to the compact size of TIC-VLA.
Training is performed using Distributed Data Parallel on
eight NVIDIA L40S GPUs, with a batch size of 2 per GPU.
AdamW is used as the optimizer with a cosine learning rate
schedule, initialized at 2 × 10−5. For training the action
expert, we increase the batch size to 16 per GPU and set
the initial learning rate to 2 × 10−4. RL fine-tuning of the
action policy is conducted on a single NVIDIA L40S GPU
for 400 iterations across three tasks in three environments.
Additional details, including hyperparameters and data pre-
processing, are provided in the supplementary material.
Baselines. We evaluate TIC-VLA against two categories
of methods. Point-goal navigation policies are included
as reference baselines to contextualize task difficulty: (1)
a vanilla Behavior Cloning (BC) policy that maps RGB
observations and point-goal commands directly to actions;
(2) a vanilla RL policy trained on RGB observations and
point-goal commands; (3) NavDP (Cai et al., 2025), a point-
goal-conditioned diffusion-based navigation policy. The
primary language-guided navigation baselines are listed be-
low: (1) NaVILA (Cheng et al., 2024), a hierarchical VLA
model that translates language instructions into mid-level
commands; (2) Uni-NaVid (Zhang et al., 2024a), a unified
video-based VLA model trained across multiple navigation
tasks; (3) DualVLN (Wei et al., 2025a), a dual-system VLA
model for language-guided navigation; (4) MobileVLA-
R1 (Huang et al., 2025), a reasoning-enhanced VLA frame-
work for mobile robots with chain-of-thought supervision;
(5) OmniVLA (Hirose et al., 2025), an omni-modal VLA
navigation model that supports language, visual-goal, and
pose-goal conditioning. All language-guided baselines are
fine-tuned on the same training datasets and evaluated under
the same settings for a fair comparison.
Evaluation metrics. We adopt the following evaluation met-
rics: (1) Navigation Error (NE): the final distance between
6


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
t=2.6s
t=6.4s
t=13.3s
t=27.9s
t=32.3s
t=2.3s
t=7.7s
t=18.3s
t=54.3s
t=57.3s
t=69.1s
I am at the end of a hallway facing a lobby with blue carpet ahead. The 
main obstacle is the wall corner at the carpet’s end. It is stationary. I am 
proceeding straight following the blue carpet. Next I continue forward 
with a slight right bias, stay centered, and proceed to the hallway end 
cautiously. 
Waypoints: (1.35, 0.14, 0.10), (2.68, -0.04, -0.01), (3.91, -0.54, -0.14)
I am in a hallway on the blue carpet approaching a doorway with the 
reception desk ahead. Two pedestrians are ahead near the doorway. 
They likely continue through the doorway. I have completed the right 
turn and am following the carpet. Next I go forward, slow and yield, then 
pass through the doorway and continue to the end.
Waypoints: ( 0.45, -0.06, -0.13), (1.71, 0.17, 0.10), (2.99, 0.44, 0.15)
I am in a hallway on the blue carpet approaching a right-side doorway. A 
pedestrian is ahead-right near the corner. They likely continue into the 
doorway away from me. I have finished the right turn and am following 
the carpet. Next I proceed straight, slow and yield if needed, then pass 
through the doorway and stop in the reception area.
Waypoints: (1.98, -0.28, -0.14), (3.91, -0.49, -0.12), (5.25, -0.63, -0.12)
I am at a doorway entering a hospital room; the hallway is to my right. I 
have moved straight with no turns and am finishing the approach to exit. 
Next I should pass through, clear the threshold, turn right into the hallway, 
and continue straight to its end while yielding.
Waypoints: (0.88, -0.01, -0.01), (2.59, -0.20, -0.08), (4.59, -0.38, -0.08)
I am in a hospital hallway just out of a room, facing down the corridor. A 
pedestrian is ahead-left near my path. They likely continue walking 
across toward the right. I have completed the right turn into the hallway 
and should proceed straight to the end, slow and yield, keep right, and 
maintain safe clearance.
Waypoints: (1.99, -0.63, -0.31), (3.73, -1.71, -0.43), (5.51, -2.79, -0.47)
I am in a hospital hallway just past a room on my right, facing straight down 
the corridor. A pedestrian is ahead-left crossing. They likely continue 
across and clear my lane. I have completed the right turn into the 
hallway and am on the straight. I will proceed forward, keep right, yield if 
needed, and continue to the hallway end.
Waypoints: (1.29, 0.00, 0.00), (2.25, -0.01, -0.00), (3.69, -0.38, -0.10)
Turn right and 
follow the blue 
carpet to the end 
of the hallway. 
Enter the room 
with the reception 
desk.
t=41.1s
Exit the room 
and turn right to 
enter the hallway. 
Continue straight 
ahead and to the 
end of the 
hallway.
Example 1
Example 2
Success
Success
Figure 4. Qualitative closed-loop results of TIC-VLA in DynaNav hospital (top) and office (bottom) environments. TIC-VLA demonstrates
effective semantic reasoning while producing reactive navigation actions in dynamic scenarios.
the agent and the goal; (2) Success Rate (SR): the percent-
age of episodes in which the agent stops within 1.5 meters
of the goal; (3) Success weighted by Path Length (SPL): SR
weighted by the ratio between the shortest path length and
the actual path length, penalizing inefficient trajectories; (4)
Collision Rate (CR): the percentage of episodes in which the
agent collides with static obstacles or humans, quantifying
the safety of navigation behavior.
Real-world experimental setup. To evaluate real-time
performance on edge devices, we deploy the model on two
platforms with different power budgets: an NVIDIA Jetson
Orin NX (25W) and an RTX 4060 Laptop GPU (50W),
representing typical edge computing capabilities. An RTX
A6000 GPU is used only when the baselines cannot run
on these devices. The navigation policy is executed on a
Unitree Go2 quadruped robot in real-world navigation tasks.
We employ FlashAttention to improve inference efficiency.
Performance is measured by the average success rate. An
episode is considered a failure if manual intervention is
required to prevent collisions.
4.2. Simulation Testing
Performance on the DynaNav benchmark. All experi-
ments are conducted on an NVIDIA L40S GPU, with the
action policy running at 10 Hz and asynchronous VLM rea-
soning running at 0.5 Hz. Results are summarized in Table 1.
Point-goal methods bypass vision-language inference and
therefore incur no reasoning latency, but they also rely on
privileged goal information. In contrast, TIC-VLA uses only
egocentric observations and language instructions, without
access to privileged goals or maps. TIC-VLA achieves
strong performance under this setting. Without RL fine-
tuning, TIC-VLA is competitive with NavDP, a point-goal
method with privileged state access, and outperforms the
vanilla BC and RL baselines. After RL fine-tuning, TIC-
VLA achieves the highest success rate and the lowest col-
lision rate, indicating improved closed-loop robustness in
dynamic scenes. Although NavDP obtains the lowest nav-
igation error and the highest SPL, it benefits from direct
point-goal supervision. TIC-VLA also clearly outperforms
prior VLN baselines, including Uni-NaVid, NaVILA, and
DualVLN. Their lower success rates and higher collision
rates suggest that methods designed for more abstract nav-
igation settings struggle with continuous control and dy-
namic obstacles. Moreover, TIC-VLA outperforms stronger
VLA baselines, including OmniVLA and MobileVLA. The
synchronous TIC-VLA variant also degrades substantially,
confirming that blocking control on slow VLM inference
harms real-time navigation. Figure 4 shows qualitative ex-
amples of TIC-VLA’s semantic reasoning and reactive nav-
igation in dynamic environments. We provide additional
dynamic video results on the project website.
Table 1. Performance of TIC-VLA and baseline methods on the
DynaNav benchmark. BC, RL, and NavDP are point-goal-based.
Method
NE (↓)
SR (↑)
SPL (↑)
CR (↓)
BC Policy
9.96
45.88
41.52
35.29
RL Policy
12.20
30.59
28.45
36.47
NavDP
8.61
54.12
52.62
30.59
Uni-NaVid
15.90
22.35
19.61
49.41
NaVILA
17.20
28.24
25.51
48.24
DualVLN
16.45
30.59
27.82
47.06
OmniVLA
16.53
31.76
28.33
49.41
MobileVLA
16.09
32.94
30.31
45.88
TIC-VLA (Sync.)
16.31
32.94
29.64
41.18
TIC-VLA (no RL)
10.85
47.06
42.41
34.12
TIC-VLA
10.55
55.29
50.29
28.24
Latency Robustness Analysis. Figure 5 reports perfor-
mance under increasing VLM reasoning inference latency
for TIC-VLA in simulation, before and after RL fine-tuning.
As latency increases, the IL-based action expert exhibits
a noticeable decline in success rate, indicating higher sen-
sitivity to delayed reasoning updates. In contrast, the RL-
7


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Figure 5. The effect of VLM asynchronous reasoning inference
latency in TIC-VLA on task performance.
fine-tuned policy maintains consistently higher success rates
across all latency settings, demonstrating improved robust-
ness to inference latency. This result highlights the effective-
ness of RL fine-tuning in mitigating latency-induced perfor-
mance degradation. Collision rates are relatively insensitive
to inference latency, suggesting that the asynchronous policy
preserves reactivity independent of reasoning speed.
Influence of Semantic-Control Interface and Latency
Awareness. We evaluate the impact of different delayed
semantic-control interfaces and latency-awareness on TIC-
VLA. Specifically, we compare interface variants that use
waypoint-based guidance and KV-cache-based features,
each trained with and without explicit latency-aware model-
ing and training. As shown in Table 2, using KV-cache fea-
tures significantly improves navigation success, and latency-
awareness enhances performance under asynchronous in-
ference. The waypoint-based interface leads to inferior
performance due to its sparsity and potential inconsistency
with the agent’s local observations. In contrast, KV-cache
features preserve richer semantic and contextual informa-
tion from the VLM, allowing the control policy to better
adapt to delayed reasoning outputs. Combining both the
KV cache feature interface and latency-aware modeling and
training achieves the best overall performance.
Table 2. Influence of semantic interface and latency training.
Interface
Latency
NE (↓)
SR (↑)
SPL (↑)
CR (↓)
Waypoint
×
21.17
16.47
15.89
47.06
Waypoint
✓
20.32
22.35
18.34
42.35
KV Cache
×
16.74
30.59
28.31
40.00
KV Cache
✓
10.85
47.06
42.41
34.12
4.3. Real-world Testing
We evaluate TIC-VLA on a Unitree Go2 robot across four
real-world navigation tasks: (1) an indoor hallway with dy-
namic human and static obstacles, (2) a cluttered office, (3)
an outdoor plaza, and (4) an outdoor walkway with uneven
terrain. These scenarios cover indoor and outdoor deploy-
ment conditions with challenges such as moving pedestrians,
narrow passages, clutter, and terrain variation. Task descrip-
tions and hardware configurations are shown in Figure 6. All
evaluations are conducted zero-shot, without task-specific
training data. For each task, we conduct five trials and re-
port the average success rate. During deployment, RGB
images from the front-facing camera are streamed to TIC-
VLA, where VLM reasoning runs asynchronously from the
high-frequency action policy.
Table 3. Real-world testing results. Runtimes for dual-system
methods are reported as action policy / VLM reasoning latency.
Method
Platform
Success Rate (↑)
Runtime (ms)
TIC-VLA (no RL)
4060
0.70
–
TIC-VLA
4060
0.85
85.73 / 3430.73
TIC-VLA
Orin NX
0.75
120.27 / 4831.73
TIC-VLA
A6000
0.80
32.70 / 1681.66
Dual-VLN (7B)
A6000
0.50
299.92 / 1534.67
NaVILA (7B)
A6000
0.35
4106.62
We compare TIC-VLA with DualVLN (Wei et al., 2025a)
and NaVILA (Cheng et al., 2024) under the same real-world
settings. As shown in Table 3, TIC-VLA achieves the high-
est success rate with a smaller model and lower control-side
latency. RL fine-tuning further improves success from 0.70
to 0.85, indicating stronger robustness in physical deploy-
ment, especially around pedestrians and obstacles. Across
compute platforms, TIC-VLA maintains a 0.75 success rate
on the Jetson Orin NX despite multi-second VLM reasoning
latency, demonstrating its suitability for edge deployment.
Although the A6000 reduces VLM latency, its success rate
does not exceed local RTX 4060 deployment, likely due
to remote communication overhead. These results show
that real-world performance depends not only on inference
speed, but also on communication latency and closed-loop
control frequency. Overall, TIC-VLA transfers zero-shot
to real-world robot navigation and remains robust under
asynchronous high-latency VLM inference, demonstrating
the practical value of explicit latency modeling.
4.4. Ablation Study
Influence of Reasoning at Test Time. We evaluate explicit
VLM reasoning during inference by comparing the RL fine-
tuned model with and without reasoning-token outputs. As
shown in Table 4, enabling reasoning clearly improves navi-
gation performance, reducing NE from 14.23 to 10.55 while
increasing SR from 40.00 to 55.29 and SPL from 34.22
to 50.29. Disabling reasoning reduces VLM overhead and
increases the forward rate from 0.5 Hz to 4 Hz, but leads to
weaker goal completion and navigation progress. Although
the non-reasoning variant has a lower collision rate, this
mainly reflects reduced activity and more frequent failure
rather than safer navigation. In contrast, the reasoning-
enabled model interacts more actively with the environment
while maintaining substantially higher task completion and
8


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Depth Camera
RGB Camera
LiDAR
Onboard Computer
w/ Jetson Orin NX
Laptop w/ RTX 4060
Desktop w/ RTX A6000
Communicate
(a)  Hardware
(b) Task Settings
(c)  Indoor Hallway Task Performance
Indoor Hallway
Indoor Office
Outdoor Plaza
Outdoor Walkway
Time
Go along the hallway and turn 
left at the corner.
Move along the walkway 
until reaching the end.
Exit the room, go through the lobby, 
and enter the room with open door
Walk toward the nearby 
vending machine.
Figure 6. Real-world evaluation of TIC-VLA. (a) Hardware configuration, including the robot platform and computation setup. (b)
Designed indoor and outdoor vision-language navigation tasks. (c) Qualitative results from an indoor hallway navigation task, showing
the robot following natural language instructions while avoiding obstacles and humans and reaching the goal.
navigation efficiency. These results indicate that test-time
reasoning improves task success, while TIC-VLA mitigates
its latency through explicit latency-aware control.
Table 4. Effect of VLM reasoning at test time.
Inference
NE (↓)
SR (↑)
SPL (↑)
CR (↓)
W/o Reasoning
14.23
40.00
34.22
25.88
W/ Reasoning
10.55
55.29
50.29
28.24
Influence of Action Prediction Horizon. We ablate the
action prediction horizon to study the trade-off between
short-term responsiveness and longer-horizon planning. A
shorter horizon makes the policy more reactive but provides
less planning context, whereas a longer horizon provides
more temporal context but can make near-term action pre-
diction less accurate. As shown in Table 5, the 3-second
horizon achieves the best overall performance among TIC-
VLA variants without RL fine-tuning. The 1-second horizon
obtains the lowest collision rate, suggesting stronger short-
term reactivity, but yields a lower success rate and SPL. The
5-second horizon also underperforms the 3-second setting,
indicating that overly long prediction horizons may reduce
control accuracy. We therefore use a 3-second prediction
horizon as the default setting.
Table 5. Effect of action prediction horizon. Results are reported
without RL fine-tuning.
Horizon
NE (↓)
SR (↑)
SPL (↑)
CR (↓)
1s
12.23
42.35
38.72
32.94
3s (ours)
10.85
47.06
42.41
34.12
5s
11.77
40.00
36.46
35.29
Influence of Ego-motion Offset in Action Policy. Table 6
shows the effect of incorporating ego-motion offset into the
latency-aware action policy. Without ego-motion offset, the
policy receives delayed semantic guidance but lacks explicit
information about how far the robot has moved since the
guidance was generated. As a result, stale VLM features
may be treated as temporally aligned with the current ob-
servation, leading to degraded navigation accuracy, lower
success rates, and less efficient trajectories. By explicitly
modeling the ego-motion accumulated during the inference
delay, the policy can reinterpret delayed semantic features
in the current robot frame. This improves the alignment
between semantic reasoning and real-time control, allow-
ing the action expert to compensate for robot displacement
and heading changes during asynchronous VLM inference,
resulting in substantially improved performance.
Table 6. Effect of incorporating ego-motion offset into the latency-
aware action policy. Results are reported without RL fine-tuning.
Method
NE (↓)
SR (↑)
SPL (↑)
CR (↓)
W/o Motion Offset
12.97
41.18
36.36
36.47
W/ Motion Offset
10.85
47.06
42.41
34.12
5. Conclusions
We introduce TIC-VLA, a latency-aware VLA framework
that addresses the temporal mismatch between slow seman-
tic reasoning and real-time control. By using a delayed
semantic-control interface and training policies under real-
istic inference delays, TIC-VLA enables robust language-
guided navigation under substantial latency. Simulation and
real-world results show consistent improvements over prior
navigation and language-guided baselines.
Limitations. TIC-VLA has three main limitations. First,
the current system is not yet fully optimized for runtime
efficiency, leaving room for faster inference and deployment.
Second, the real-world evaluation remains limited in scale,
requiring larger studies to further validate robustness. Third,
extending beyond navigation to domains such as robotic
manipulation remains future work.
9


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Center of Excellence on
New Mobility and Automated Vehicles (Mobility COE),
the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Award No.
2346267, POSE: Phase II - DriveX: An Open Source Ecosys-
tem for Automated Driving and Intelligent Transportation
Research, and the NVIDIA Academic Grant Program. Yun
Zhang was supported by the Amazon Trainium Fellowship.
Impact Statement
This work advances VLA models for real-time robot navi-
gation by addressing inference latency and limited onboard
computation. TIC-VLA may support deployment in service
robotics, logistics, and assisted mobility, especially on edge
platforms. At the same time, robots operating in shared
human spaces can pose safety and ethical risks, including
misinterpretation of instructions, collisions, and socially
inappropriate behavior. Although latency-aware reactive
control helps reduce these risks, the system remains sub-
ject to perception, reasoning, and control failures. Human
oversight is therefore necessary in safety-critical settings.
References
Bai, S., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Song, S.,
Dang, K., Wang, P., Wang, S., Tang, J., et al. Qwen2.5-vl
technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923, 2025.
Bar, A., Zhou, G., Tran, D., Darrell, T., and LeCun, Y. Nav-
igation world models. In Proceedings of the Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 15791–
15801, 2025.
Cai, W., Peng, J., Yang, Y., Zhang, Y., Wei, M., Wang,
H., Chen, Y., Wang, T., and Pang, J. Navdp: Learning
sim-to-real navigation diffusion policy with privileged
information guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08712,
2025.
Castro, M. G., Rajagopal, S., Gorbatov, D., Schmittle, M.,
Baijal, R., Zhang, O., Scalise, R., Talia, S., Romig, E.,
de Melo, C., et al. Vamos: A hierarchical vision-language-
action model for capability-modulated and steerable navi-
gation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20818, 2025.
Chandaka, B., Wang, G. X., Chen, H., Che, H., Zhai, A. J.,
and Wang, S. Human-like navigation in a world built for
humans. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1790–
1808. PMLR, 2025.
Chen, H., Zhao, M., Yang, R., Ma, Q., Yang, K., Yao,
J., Wang, K., Bai, H., Wang, Z., Pan, R., et al. Era:
Transforming vlms into embodied agents via embodied
prior learning and online reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.12693, 2025a.
Chen, Z., Guo, Y., Chu, Z., Luo, M., Shen, Y., Sun, M.,
Hu, J., Xie, S., Yang, K., Shi, P., et al. Socialnav: Train-
ing human-inspired foundation model for socially-aware
embodied navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21135,
2025b.
Cheng, A.-C., Ji, Y., Yang, Z., Gongye, Z., Zou, X., Kautz,
J., Bıyık, E., Yin, H., Liu, S., and Wang, X. Navila:
Legged robot vision-language-action model for naviga-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04453, 2024.
Choi, W., Kim, W. K., Yoo, M., and Woo, H. Embodied cot
distillation from llm to off-the-shelf agents. In Proceed-
ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 8702–8721, 2024.
Dong, Y., Wu, F., He, Q., Li, H., Li, M., Cheng, Z., Zhou,
Y., Sun, J., Dai, Q., Cheng, Z.-Q., et al. Ha-vln: A bench-
mark for human-aware navigation in discrete-continuous
environments with dynamic multi-human interactions,
real-world validation, and an open leaderboard. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.14229, 2025.
Driess, D., Springenberg, J., Ichter, B., Yu, L., Li-Bell,
A., Pertsch, K., Ren, A., Walke, H., Vuong, Q., Shi,
L. X., et al. Knowledge insulating vision-language-action
models: Train fast, run fast, generalize better. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 38:102867–
102888, 2026.
Du, Y., Fu, T., Chen, Z., Li, B., Su, S., Zhao, Z., and
Wang, C. Vl-nav: real-time vision-language navigation
with spatial reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00931,
2025.
Eftekhar, A., Hendrix, R., Weihs, L., Duan, J., Caglar, E.,
Salvador, J., Herrasti, A., Han, W., VanderBil, E., Kemb-
havi, A., et al. The one ring: a robotic indoor navigation
generalist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14401, 2024.
Elnoor, M., Weerakoon, K., Seneviratne, G., Liang, J., Ra-
jagopal, V., and Manocha, D. Vilam: Distilling vision-
language reasoning into attention maps for social robot
navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09820, 2026.
Gao, C., Jin, L., Peng, X., Zhang, J., Deng, Y., Li, A., Wang,
H., and Liu, S. Octonav: Towards generalist embodied
navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09839, 2025.
Gong, Z., Hu, T., Qiu, R., and Liang, J. From cognition
to precognition: A future-aware framework for social
navigation. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9122–9129. IEEE,
2025.
He, H., Ma, Y., Wu, W., and Zhou, B. From seeing to
experiencing: Scaling navigation foundation models with
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.22028,
2025.
10


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Hirose, N., Glossop, C., Shah, D., and Levine, S. Omnivla:
An omni-modal vision-language-action model for robot
navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.19480, 2025.
Hu, J., Chen, J., Bai, H., Luo, M., Xie, S., Chen, Z., Liu,
F., Chu, Z., Xue, X., Ren, B., et al. Astranav-world:
World model for foresight control and consistency. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2512.21714, 2025a.
Hu, Z., Tang, C., Munje, M. J., Zhu, Y., Liu, A., Liu,
S., Warnell, G., Stone, P., and Biswas, J. Composable-
nav: Instruction-following navigation in dynamic envi-
ronments via composable diffusion. In Conference on
Robot Learning, pp. 4246–4268. PMLR, 2025b.
Huang, T., Li, D., Yang, R., Zhang, Z., Yang, Z., and Tang,
H. Mobilevla-r1: Reinforcing vision-language-action for
mobile robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.17889, 2025.
InternRobotics.
Internvla-n1:
An open dual-system
navigation
foundation
model
with
learned
la-
tent
plans.
https://huggingface.co/
InternRobotics/InternVLA-N1, 2025.
Ac-
cessed: 2025-10-10.
Isaac-sim development team.
IsaacSim:
An open-
source robotics simulation platform on NVIDIA Om-
niverse.
https://github.com/isaac-sim/
IsaacSim, 2025.
Accessed: 2025-10-09; version
v5.0.0.
Karnan, H., Nair, A., Xiao, X., Warnell, G., Pirk, S., Toshev,
A., Hart, J., Biswas, J., and Stone, P. Socially compli-
ant navigation dataset (scand): A large-scale dataset of
demonstrations for social navigation. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 7(4):11807–11814, 2022.
Krantz, J., Wijmans, E., Majundar, A., Batra, D., and Lee, S.
Beyond the nav-graph: Vision and language navigation
in continuous environments. In European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Ku, A., Anderson, P., Patel, R., Ie, E., and Baldridge, J.
Room-across-room: Multilingual vision-and-language
navigation with dense spatiotemporal grounding. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 4392–4412,
2020.
Li, H., Zuo, Y., Yu, J., Zhang, Y., Yang, Z., Zhang, K.,
Zhu, X., Zhang, Y., Chen, T., Cui, G., et al. Simplevla-rl:
Scaling vla training via reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.09674, 2025.
Li, X., Li, C., Xia, Q., Bisk, Y., Celikyilmaz, A., Gao,
J., Smith, N. A., and Choi, Y. Robust navigation with
language pretraining and stochastic sampling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 1494–1499, 2019.
Liang, J., Das, D., Song, D., Shuvo, M. N. H., Durrani, M.,
Taranath, K., Penskiy, I., Manocha, D., and Xiao, X. Gnd:
Global navigation dataset with multi-modal perception
and multi-category traversability in outdoor campus en-
vironments. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2383–2390. IEEE,
2025.
Lin, F., Nai, R., Hu, Y., You, J., Zhao, J., and Gao, Y.
Onetwovla: A unified vision-language-action model with
adaptive reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11917,
2025.
Liu, W., Zhao, H., Li, C., Biswas, J., Okal, B., Goyal, P.,
Chang, Y., and Pouya, S. X-mobility: End-to-end gen-
eralizable navigation via world modeling. In 2025 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 7569–7576. IEEE, 2025a.
Liu, W., Zhao, H., Li, C., Biswas, J., Pouya, S., and
Chang, Y. Compass: Cross-embodiment mobility pol-
icy via residual rl and skill synthesis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.16372, 2025b.
Lu, G., Guo, W., Zhang, C., Zhou, Y., Jiang, H., Gao, Z.,
Tang, Y., and Wang, Z. Vla-rl: Towards masterful and
general robotic manipulation with scalable reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18719, 2025.
Mittal, M., Roth, P., Tigue, J., Richard, A., Zhang, O., Du,
P., Serrano-Mu˜noz, A., Yao, X., Zurbr¨ugg, R., Rudin, N.,
et al. Isaac lab: A gpu-accelerated simulation frame-
work for multi-modal robot learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.04831, 2025.
Munje, M. J., Tang, C., Liu, S., Hu, Z., Zhu, Y., Cui, J.,
Warnell, G., Biswas, J., and Stone, P. Socialnav-sub:
Benchmarking vlms for scene understanding in social
robot navigation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp.
1120–1143. PMLR, 2025.
Payandeh, A., Pokhrel, A., Song, D., Zampieri, M., and
Xiao, X. Narrate2nav: Real-time visual navigation with
implicit language reasoning in human-centric environ-
ments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14233, 2025a.
Payandeh, A., Song, D., Nazeri, M., Liang, J., Mukherjee, P.,
Raj, A. H., Kong, Y., Manocha, D., and Xiao, X. Social-
llava: Enhancing social robot navigation through human-
language reasoning. In 2025 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
17192–17198. IEEE, 2025b.
11


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Raychaudhuri, S. and Chang, A. X. Semantic mapping in
indoor embodied ai-a survey on advances, challenges,
and future directions. Transactions on Machine Learning
Research, 2025.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Shcherbyna, V., Kastner, L., Diaz, D., Nguyen, H. G.,
Schreff, M. H.-K., Seeger, T., Kreutz, J., Martban, A.,
Shen, Z., Zeng, H., et al. Arena 4.0: A comprehen-
sive ros2 development and benchmarking platform for
human-centric navigation using generative-model-based
environment generation. In 2025 IEEE International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9138–
9144. IEEE, 2025.
Shukor, M., Aubakirova, D., Capuano, F., Kooijmans, P.,
Palma, S., Zouitine, A., Aractingi, M., Pascal, C., Russi,
M., Marafioti, A., et al. Smolvla: A vision-language-
action model for affordable and efficient robotics. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.01844, 2025.
Tang, C., Abbatematteo, B., Hu, J., Chandra, R., Mart´ın-
Mart´ın, R., and Stone, P. Deep reinforcement learning
for robotics: A survey of real-world successes. Annual
Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 8
(1):153–188, 2025.
Wang, H., Chen, J., Huang, W., Ben, Q., Wang, T., Mi, B.,
Huang, T., Zhao, S., Chen, Y., Yang, S., et al. Grutopia:
Dream general robots in a city at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.10943, 2024.
Wang, L., Xia, X., Zhao, H., Wang, H., Wang, T., Chen, Y.,
Liu, C., Chen, Q., and Pang, J. Rethinking the embodied
gap in vision-and-language navigation: A holistic study
of physical and visual disparities. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pp. 9455–9465, 2025a.
Wang, S., Zhang, J., Li, M., Liu, J., Li, A., Wu, K., Zhong,
F., Yu, J., Zhang, Z., and Wang, H. Trackvla: Embod-
ied visual tracking in the wild. In Conference on Robot
Learning, pp. 4139–4164. PMLR, 2025b.
Wei, M., Wan, C., Peng, J., Yu, X., Yang, Y., Feng, D.,
Cai, W., Zhu, C., Wang, T., Pang, J., et al. Ground slow,
move fast: A dual-system foundation model for gener-
alizable vision-and-language navigation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.08186, 2025a.
Wei, M., Wan, C., Yu, X., Wang, T., Yang, Y., Mao, X., Zhu,
C., Cai, W., Wang, H., Chen, Y., et al. Streamvln: Stream-
ing vision-and-language navigation via slowfast context
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05240, 2025b.
Wu, J., Zhou, Y., Yang, H., Huang, Z., and Lv, C. Human-
guided reinforcement learning with sim-to-real transfer
for autonomous navigation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(12):14745–14759,
2023.
Wu, W., He, H., Zhang, C., He, J., Zhao, S. Z., Gong, R.,
Li, Q., and Zhou, B. Towards autonomous micromobility
through scalable urban simulation. In Proceedings of the
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp.
27553–27563, 2025.
Xu, Z., Chiang, H.-T. L., Fu, Z., Jacob, M. G., Zhang, T.,
Lee, T.-W. E., Yu, W., Schenck, C., Rendleman, D., Shah,
D., et al. Mobility vla: Multimodal instruction navigation
with long-context vlms and topological graphs. In 8th
Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2024.
Yu, Z., Long, Y., Yang, Z., Zeng, C., Fan, H., Zhang, J., and
Dong, H. Correctnav: Self-correction flywheel empowers
vision-language-action navigation model. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
ume 40, pp. 18737–18745, 2026.
Yuan, M., Wang, L., and Waslander, S. L. Opennav: Open-
world navigation with multimodal large language models.
In 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 18948–18955. IEEE,
2025.
Zeng, S., Qi, D., Chang, X., Xiong, F., Xie, S., Wu,
X., Liang, S., Xu, M., and Wei, X.
Janusvln: De-
coupling semantics and spatiality with dual implicit
memory for vision-language navigation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.22548, 2025.
Zhang, J., Wang, K., Wang, S., Li, M., Liu, H., Wei, S.,
Wang, Z., Zhang, Z., and Wang, H. Uni-navid: A video-
based vision-language-action model for unifying embod-
ied navigation tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06224,
2024a.
Zhang, J., Wang, K., Xu, R., Zhou, G., Hong, Y., Fang,
X., Wu, Q., Zhang, Z., and Wang, H. Navid: Video-
based vlm plans the next step for vision-and-language
navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15852, 2024b.
Zhang, J., Li, A., Qi, Y., Li, M., Liu, J., Wang, S., Liu,
H., Zhou, G., Wu, Y., Li, X., et al. Embodied naviga-
tion foundation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.12129,
2025a.
Zhang, S., Qiao, Y., Wang, Q., Guo, L., Wei, Z., and Liu,
J. Flexvln: Flexible adaptation for diverse vision-and-
language navigation tasks. IEEE Transactions on Multi-
media, 27:6307–6318, 2025b.
12


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Zhao, Q., Lu, Y., Kim, M. J., Fu, Z., Zhang, Z., Wu, Y.,
Li, Z., Ma, Q., Han, S., Finn, C., et al. Cot-vla: Visual
chain-of-thought reasoning for vision-language-action
models.
In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 1702–1713, 2025.
Zhou, G., Hong, Y., and Wu, Q. Navgpt: Explicit reasoning
in vision-and-language navigation with large language
models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 7641–7649, 2024.
Zhou, Z., Cai, T., Zhao, S., Zhang, Y., Huang, Z., Zhou,
B., and Ma, J. Autovla: A vision-language-action model
for end-to-end autonomous driving with adaptive reason-
ing and reinforcement fine-tuning. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 38:27920–27956, 2026.
Zhu, J., Wang, W., Chen, Z., Liu, Z., Ye, S., Gu, L., Tian,
H., Duan, Y., Su, W., Shao, J., et al. Internvl3: Exploring
advanced training and test-time recipes for open-source
multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10479,
2025.
13


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
TIC-VLA Supplementary Materials
A. Model Details
VLM Backbone. Our model is built upon an InternVL3-1B vision-language model, which consists of an InternViT-300M
vision encoder and a Qwen2.5-0.5B language model. The VLM processes a sequence of historical images spanning up to a
nine-second temporal window to perform reasoning and generate high-level planning waypoints. Images are sampled at
three-second intervals, resulting in three historical frames and one current frame. Each image is captured at a resolution of
1920 × 1080, and these images are encoded into visual tokens of size 4 × 256, which together provide both temporal and
historical context for reasoning.
Due to reasoning inference latency, the visual observations fed into the VLM are temporally lagged relative to the real-time
sensory inputs received by the action expert. To ensure consistent visual representations across modules, the vision encoder
is shared between the VLM and the action expert. Specifically, the shared encoder processes the current image observation
and outputs visual tokens that are directly consumed by the action expert for real-time control.
Action Expert. The action expert is implemented as a Transformer-based architecture composed of six cross-attention
layers. Its inputs include: (1) current visual tokens (256 tokens) extracted from the shared vision encoder, (2) the robot’s
proprioceptive state, (3) delayed semantic guidance from the VLM, and (4) latency-related metadata. The VLM guidance is
provided either in the form of abstract waypoint predictions or as key-value (KV) cache features from the final Transformer
layer of the VLM. The robot state is represented by a vector consisting of the linear velocities (vx, vy) and the yaw rate (ωz).
To explicitly account for inference latency, we incorporate latency-related metadata, including the estimated robot displace-
ment during the inference delay (∆x, ∆y, ∆θ), and the corresponding time delay ∆t. Visual tokens are projected from 896
dimensions to 512 dimensions, VLM KV cache features are projected from 256 to 512 dimensions, and low-dimensional
inputs (waypoint guidance and latency metadata) are projected to 512 dimensions, followed by positional embeddings. We
apply token dropout to the KV-cache tokens (drop rate 0.1) to encourage robustness to missing semantic context, and apply
dropout to the encoded robot-state tokens/positional embeddings (drop rate 0.5) to reduce overfitting to state inputs.
All processed features are treated as scene context and serve as keys and values in the cross-attention Transformer. The
queries are learnable embeddings indexed by time steps, enabling the model to produce structured predictions. Transformer
outputs are passed through an MLP to produce action chunks at each predicted step.
We predict actions over a future horizon of three seconds, discretized into T = 30 action chunks. Each action is parameterized
as (dx, dy, dθ), representing relative motion increments. A simple integrator (cumulative sum) is applied to accumulate
these actions into a continuous trajectory, yielding waypoints of the form (x, y, θ).
Value Network. The value network shares the same vision encoder as the action expert and operates on the current image
observation. The resulting 256 visual tokens are first processed by three 1D convolutional layers followed by an average
pooling layer, reducing them to a compact feature representation. In parallel, the robot state (vx, vy) and yaw rate (ωz), as
well as the relative goal position, are concatenated and projected into the same feature dimension using MLPs. These feature
representations are concatenated and passed through a final MLP to predict the scalar value estimate.
The hyperparameters used in model components are summarized in Table 7.
B. Training Details
Data Processing. We start from long-horizon raw data collected continuously within a single scenario or location. Each
raw sequence is segmented into a set of fixed-length episodes, each spanning 20 seconds. For each episode, we retain only
the egocentric RGB images and the corresponding robot pose trajectories, discarding other sensor modalities. All data are
temporally downsampled to 10 Hz to ensure a consistent representation across datasets and training stages.
For each episode, we construct a structured representation consisting of a history window, a current frame, and a future
trajectory. The history contains past frames with relative pose offsets, while the future trajectory is represented as a sequence
of relative motion offsets with respect to the current pose. These offsets are expressed in the robot-centric coordinate
frame. Episodes are further subsampled at a fixed temporal stride to reduce redundancy, resulting in one annotated sample
approximately every three seconds. This preprocessing yields a compact yet diverse set of training samples suitable for both
14


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Table 7. Model Parameters
Parameter
Value
Token dim.
896
Proj. dim.
512
Dropout rate-KV cache
0.1
Dropout rate-state
0.5
Cross-attn layers
6
Query dim.
512
Queries (T)
30
FFN dim.
2048
Horizon (s)
3
Conv1D layers
3
Table 8. Training Parameters
Parameter
Value
LR-Action
2×10−4
LR-VLM
2×10−5
Weight decay
1×10−2
Batch size-VLM
2 per GPU
Batch size-Action
16 per GPU
Epoch
10
LR sched.
Cosine
Warmup
1000 step
Grad. clip
1.0
Table 9. RL Parameters
Parameter
Value
Action LR
1×10−5
Value LR
1×10−4
Rollout steps
1024
Gamma
0.99
GAE Lambda
0.95
Clip ratio
0.2
Grad. clip
0.5
Entropy coef.
0.001
PPO epochs
5
Batch size
64
vision-language modeling and control learning.
Phase 1:  Instruction Generation per Episode
Trajectory
Stepwise offsets relative to the previous frame, accumulated 
from episode start.
“From 0.0s to current timestamp time is 19.9s. (a list of 
waypoints 1s in between): (0.26, -0.20, -0.00), (0.67, -0.01, -
0.00), (0.67, -0.18, -0.00), (0.69, 0.00, -0.00), …”
You are a robot reasoning about navigation actions in an ego-centric FLU frame. 
You observe past, current, and future  camera images with spatial context relative to the current pose, along with an accumulated past 
trajectory from the start of the episode to now.
Global Instruction: {instruction}. This is a global plan defined from the beginning of the task, and the current frame may be midway 
through execution.
Write one first-person paragraph under 60 words, using complete sentences only. Do not label sections, repeat observations, include 
offsets/numbers, or speculate beyond evidence. Prioritize safe execution aligned with the global instruction.  Including:  
   - Current Situation: describe the robot’s present environment and spatial context using only past and current observations.
   - Critical Object (Spatial): identify the most relevant nearby agent or obstacle affecting motion or safety.
   - Object Motion (Spatiotemporal): infer likely motion trends of that object from changes across past and current views.
   - Task Understanding: determine which instruction steps have been completed by analyzing the accumulated trajectory from the 
episode start to the current time.
   - Next 10s Plan Execution: describe the remaining actions to safely execute the instruction over the next short horizon, using future 
predictions only for planning.
Example: “I'm in a lobby approaching an intersection. There is a pedestrian on my front-right stepping into my path. They are...
t
t+5
t+10
t+15
t+20
t - 3
t - 6
t - 9
I am in a hospital lobby at a corridor junction beside the 
vending machine on my left. A pedestrian ahead near the 
machine may step into my path. I have completed the 
straight approach and begun the right turn at the machine. 
Next I will finish the turn, yield if needed, and continue 
through the corridor.
Reasoning
GPT-5
You are planning a concise, high-level navigation instruction for a 
mobile robot over a 20-second horizon.
The instruction is generated from time-sampled visual observations and 
future motion cues relative to the current pose.
Your task is to produce four alternative phrasings that describe the same 
route over the full horizon.
Each instruction must be 1) One short imperative sentence, 2) Based on 
clearly identifiable, static landmarks, 3) Semantically consistent across 
all variants, 4) Focus on macro-level wayfinding only.
Do not include any moving agents, avoidance behavior, or fine-grained 
maneuvers in the instruction.
Prompt
1. “Proceed straight toward the vending machine, turn right at the vending 
machine, and follow the corridor ahead.”
2. “Head straight toward the vending machine, turn right at the vending 
machine, and continue through the corridor.” 
3. “Go straight to the vending machine, then turn right at the vending 
machine and continue down the corridor.”
4. “Continue forward to the vending machine, then make a right at the 
vending machine and go along the corridor.”
Generated Instruction
Phase 2:  Reasoning Generation per Frame
Prompt
GPT-5
Five ego-centric images 
evenly sampled over the 
20-second episode
Visual Observations
Accumulated stepwise ego-
motion offsets between 
consecutive frames
Trajectory Info
Past & Future Ego-centric Images
Keyframe offsets for sampled images, expressed in 
current ego frame.
Image Offsets 
Figure 7. Overview of the annotation pipeline for VLM SFT. Representative frames and future trajectory information are used to generate
long-horizon navigation instructions and concise CoT reasoning annotations.
VLM Supervised Fine-Tuning. We first perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) of the VLM. For each 20-second episode,
we automatically generate a long-term navigation instruction using GPT-5. To provide sufficient temporal context, we select
five representative frames corresponding to the current time step and future time offsets at 5, 10, 15, and 20 seconds. These
frames, together with the future trajectory offsets, are used to prompt the language model to generate four semantically
equivalent instruction variants describing the same route. The variants differ only in wording and are randomly assigned
across episodes to increase linguistic diversity while preserving route consistency. Figure 7 illustrates the annotation pipeline
for navigation instruction generation and scenario reasoning on the DynaNav simulation data, while Figure 8 presents
representative examples of instruction and reasoning annotations from the GND and SCAND datasets.
In addition to language instructions, we annotate each episode with a concise reasoning trace. The reasoning trace is
generated by conditioning GPT-5 on a richer temporal context that includes the past trajectory, observations at 3, 6, and
9 seconds in the past, the current observation, and future observations. The past trajectory is summarized at 1s intervals
from the start of the episode to the current time, expressed in the local frame of the previous 1s observation, to help the
model infer motion patterns and task progress. The generated CoT focuses on five aspects: (1) the current situation, (2)
critical objects, (3) object motion, (4) task progress relative to the instruction, and (5) the next short-horizon plan. To ensure
efficiency and consistency, the reasoning trace is constrained to be brief and is stored alongside the episode.
During SFT, the vision encoder is frozen. The language model is trained to autoregressively generate either (1) a reasoning-
augmented sequence followed by waypoint predictions or (2) waypoint-only outputs. Mixing these two target formats allows
15


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
I am on a narrow sidewalk beside the building, having come straight from the 
dumpster area, nearing a corner with bicycle racks. The critical obstacle is the 
bikes ahead-left. They appear stationary. I have finished the straight approach and 
reached the left-turn point. Next I should turn left around the corner and proceed 
along the sidewalk by the building.
Reasoning
Past & Future Ego-centric Images
Head straight along the sidewalk 
past the parking garage, then turn 
left and follow the sidewalk 
continuing along the garage.
Instruction
t
t+5
t+10
t - 3
t+15
t - 6
t+20
t - 9
I am moving along a crowded street fair toward the tower, with an orange arch ahead 
and a building on my left. Pedestrians cluster in my path and may drift across. I have 
been proceeding straight and continue to do so, moving cautiously and yielding as 
needed while passing beneath the orange arch.
Reasoning
Move forward toward in the 
center of the street and pass 
beneath the orange arch.
Instruction
t
t+5
t+10
t - 3
t+15
t - 6
t+20
t - 9
(b) SCAND data
(a) GND data
Past & Future Ego-centric Images
Figure 8. Examples of navigation instruction and CoT reasoning annotations from the GND and SCAND datasets.
the VLM to flexibly produce explicit reasoning when required and output only waypoints to maintain efficiency.
Imitation Learning with Delayed Inference. After fine-tuning the VLM, we train the action expert via imitation learning
while explicitly accounting for inference latency. To simulate real-world deployment conditions, we randomly sample
inference delays and expose the action policy to temporally delayed VLM inference hidden states together with explicit
latency metadata. During training, the policy is conditioned on delayed ground-truth reasoning annotations and guidance
waypoints, ensuring access to the correct high-level intent. The overall training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Imitation Learning with Delayed Inference
Require: Demonstration dataset D, action policy πθ, frozen VLM fLM
1: for each training iteration do
2:
Sample instruction, current visual observation, and expert future trajectory, (I, xt, {ˆpt}) ∼D
3:
Sample inference delay ∆t ∼U(0, 10)
4:
Retrieve delayed visual observations and reasoning traces (X vlm
t−∆t, Rt−∆t) ∼D
5:
Obtain delayed VLM hidden state (KV cache) St−∆t ←fLM(Vvlm
t−∆t, I, Rt−∆t)
6:
Extract current visual tokens Vact
t
= Encvis(xt)
7:
Encode robot state st and latency metadata (∆t, ∆x, ∆y, ∆θ)
8:
Predict action chunk {a(1:T )
t
} ←πθ(Vact
t , St−∆t, st, ∆t, ∆x, ∆y, ∆θ)
9:
Integrate the predicted actions to obtain trajectory {p(1:T )
t
}
10:
Compute imitation loss La
11:
Update θ by minimizing La
12: end for
For the waypoint-guided policy variant, we transform the delayed VLM-predicted waypoints into the coordinate frame of
the robot’s current position before conditioning the action policy. The same transformation is applied consistently during
both training and inference. The parameters used for training are provided in Table 8.
Online Reinforcement Learning. At each control step, the action expert predicts a short-horizon trajectory, from which
we select a target corresponding to one second into the future. This target is converted into a desired linear velocity and
angular velocity, which define the mean of a Gaussian action distribution. The policy additionally maintains a learnable
log-standard-deviation parameter, yielding a stochastic Gaussian policy suitable for on-policy optimization. To preserve
consistency with deployment conditions, the policy continues to operate on temporally delayed VLM inference hidden
states and latency metadata during reinforcement learning. Delayed VLM hidden states are cached during rollout collection
and reused during policy optimization. We adopt Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) with a
learned value function to optimize the policy under this delayed-inference setting. The overall procedure is summarized in
Algorithm 2 and the parameters used for PPO are provided in Table 9.
16


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Algorithm 2 Online Reinforcement Learning
Require: Action policy πθ, value network Vψ, frozen VLM fLM, environment E
1: for each PPO iteration do
2:
Initialize rollout buffer B ←∅
3:
for each environment step t do
4:
Observe current visual observation xt and robot state st
5:
Run VLM inference asynchronously in the background
6:
Retrieve delayed VLM inference hidden state St−∆t and latency metadata (∆t, ∆x, ∆y, ∆θ)
7:
Extract current visual tokens Vact
t
= Encvis(xt)
8:
Compute Gaussian policy parameters (µt, log σ) ←πθ(Vact, St−∆t, st, ∆t, ∆x, ∆y, ∆θ)
9:
Sample action at ∼N(µt, σ2)
10:
Execute at in environment E and observe reward rt and next state
11:
Store data (xt, St−∆t, st, at, rt, ∆t, ∆x, ∆y, ∆θ) in B
12:
end for
13:
Compute returns ˆRt and advantages ˆAt using value network Vψ
14:
for each PPO optimization epoch do
15:
Update policy πθ using clipped surrogate objective
16:
Update value network Vψ by minimizing value regression loss
17:
end for
18: end for
C. Benchmark Details
We evaluate navigation methods using a language-conditioned physics-based benchmark consisting of 85 episodes across
four environments: Hospital, Office, Outdoor, and Warehouse. Each episode specifies a unique combination of scene layout,
start pose, goal location, and natural-language instruction. Task difficulty is systematically increased by varying pedestrian
density (from 0 to 200 agents), instruction complexity, and time limits, while maintaining consistent goals within each task.
Pedestrian agents exhibit diverse visual appearances and body types to increase visual variability and reduce reliance on
appearance-specific cues. Figure 9 illustrates navigation instructions and scenarios included in the benchmark.
For each environment, we design multiple navigation tasks that share the same semantic objective but differ in crowd density,
robot platform (Nova Carter or Spot), and timeout constraints. This design enables controlled evaluation of robustness to
dynamic obstacles, long-horizon instruction following, and cross-robot generalization. An episode is considered successful
if the robot reaches the target location within a predefined distance threshold before the time limit; outdoor environments
use a relaxed threshold to account for large-scale spatial uncertainty. All experiments are conducted with a fixed random
seed to ensure reproducibility.
Hospital Environment. We conducted 25 episodes in a large hospital scene featuring long corridors, patient rooms, medical
equipment, and service areas. Tasks involve reaching vending machines, hospital beds, water dispensers, and hallway
endpoints under dense pedestrian traffic. The hospital setting is characterized by narrow passages, frequent occlusions, and
socially constrained motion, making it particularly challenging for safe navigation under crowd interference. For each task
type, we systematically vary the number of simulated pedestrians from 0 to 60 and proportionally increase the episode
timeout. This setting evaluates robustness to crowd density and social navigation challenges in structured indoor spaces.
Office Environment. We perform 25 episodes in a complex office environment composed of interconnected rooms,
corridors, elevators, and desk areas. Tasks emphasize multi-step spatial instructions involving turns, room entries, and
landmark-based goals (e.g., desks, carpets, doors), often beyond immediate perceptual range. The office environment
introduces greater topological diversity and branching layouts, requiring precise instruction grounding rather than corridor
following. Pedestrian density is again increased from 0 to 60 to study performance degradation under dynamic human
participants in semantically rich but spatially compact environments.
Warehouse Environment. We evaluate 25 episodes in a structured warehouse scene with long aisles, racks, forklifts, cones,
and fire extinguishers. The tasks emphasize fine-grained spatial reasoning, such as selecting the correct aisle, identifying
object instances in repetitive layouts, and navigating to precise rack locations. The warehouse presents high visual repetition
with minimal semantic diversity, stressing the model’s ability to disambiguate similar structures under motion and crowd
17


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
interference. Pedestrian density is varied from 0 to 60 with adjusted timeouts to control task difficulty. Owing to the
warehouse’s compact spatial layout relative to the office and hospital environments, this setting represents the most crowded
and visually ambiguous scenario.
Outdoor Environment. We include 10 episodes in a large-scale outdoor urban environment with uneven terrain, ramps,
streets, and large open spaces. These tasks involve long-distance navigation guided by distant landmarks, such as buildings,
umbrellas, fountains, and storefronts. The number of pedestrians ranges from 100 to 200, and a relaxed success threshold is
used to account for localization uncertainty and large-scale goals. Due to the substantially higher rendering and simulation
cost of large outdoor scenes, we limit this setting to 10 episodes while maintaining high environmental diversity. These
episodes test scalability, visual clutter robustness, and instruction grounding in outdoor settings, representing the most
demanding setting in terms of perception, planning horizon, and real-time control stability.
Go straight ahead and 
stop at the vending 
machine at front.
Walk straight down the hallway 
and stop at the red bed located to 
the right of the doors.
Go straight past the wheelchairs 
and stop at the water dispenser 
by the window.
Move forward and then turn left to 
enter the hallway. Continue straight 
ahead and stop in front of the blue 
hospital bed on the right side.
Exit the room and turn right to enter 
the hallway. Continue straight ahead 
and to the end of the hallway.
Go straight ahead and 
stop at the nearest 
elevator.
Turn right and follow the blue carpet 
to the end of the hallway. Enter the 
room with the reception desk.
Go through the hallway, then turn 
left at the end to approach the red 
emergency exit door.
Go straight down the hallway, turn left 
at the end, then continue forward to 
enter the office room. Move inside and 
stop in front of the desk on the right.
Go through the hallway and then enter 
the office desk area and stop at the 
white desk with the plant on it, located 
on the right side of the wall at the end.
Proceed to the yellow forklift 
at the entrance of Aisle 06 
(the first aisle from the right).
Go straight to leave the current 
aisle. Turn right to approach the 
fire extinguisher on the wall.
Enter Aisle 01, the leftmost aisle, 
and continue to the end.
Go straight to enter Aisle 06, 
passing the yellow forklift to reach 
the end of the aisle.
Go straight past the aisle ahead. Turn 
right at the end and proceed forward to 
approach the fire extinguisher on the 
last rack.
Go straight until reach the black 
and white striped umbrellas.
Drive forward alongside the building 
and stop when you reach the last 
pillar at the far end on your left.
Go to the gray library building 
across the street and stop next to 
the sign wall.
Cross the street and continue straight 
until you reach the storefront with the 
yellow UPSWAY sign.
Continue forward, turn left to go down 
the ramp on the left side of the red 
triangular yield sign, then head toward 
the fountain.
Hospital
Office
Warehouse
Outdoor
Figure 9. Overview of the DynaNav benchmark. Task instructions are provided, as well as corresponding navigation scenarios across the
Hospital, Office, Outdoor, and Warehouse environments, highlighting variations in scene layout, landmarks, and human density.
D. Experiment Details
Data Collection. We collect demonstration data by asking a human expert to teleoperate the robot using a keyboard across
four designed environments (warehouse, office, hospital, and outdoor) within the DynaNav simulation. Each environment
contains dynamic human participants. The expert navigates the robot toward predefined goals, and upon completing each
demonstration, records a corresponding natural language instruction describing the navigation task. The resulting dataset
consists of RGB images and trajectories of robot camera poses. In total, we collected 310 episodes, corresponding to 5.1
hours of navigation data.
Online Reinforcement Learning. We perform online RL of the TIC-VLA model on three different tasks (different from
testing) across three environments: office, hospital, and warehouse. The environment operates at a control frequency of
10 Hz, corresponding to an environment step of 0.1 seconds. During training, the VLM runs inference asynchronously in
18


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
the background upon receiving new observations and returns its outputs to the action policy once available. We finetune
only the final cross-attention Transformer layer and the MLP decoder of the action expert. To emulate deployment on
resource-constrained hardware, we explicitly inject random inference delays before releasing the VLM outputs to the policy,
with an average delay of approximately 50 environment steps (5 seconds). The three tasks and environments, illustrated in
Figure 10, are rotated every 100 PPO iterations.
Env 1: Warehouse
Task 1: Go forward and enter Aisle 04, 
follow the aisle to its end, turn right, and 
continue until reaching the far wall. 
Env 2: Office
Task 2: Move forward through the 
doorway into the office area, turn left, 
and stop at the desk against the wall.
Env 3: Hospital
Task 3: Go across the hallway, then 
move straight ahead until the vending 
machine at the end of the hallway.
Figure 10. Online reinforcement learning tasks used to train TIC-VLA across three environments and tasks.
The weights for the reward function (Equation (5)) are set to wg = 400 for reaching the goal, wp = 5 for progress toward
the goal, wc = −100 for collisions with obstacles and humans, and ws = −0.1 for the speed penalty. The target speed for
the speed penalty is set to 1 m/s.
Baseline Methods. We compare our approach against several baseline methods. The behavior cloning (BC) baseline is
trained directly on the demonstration dataset without modeling inference latency or delayed perception, while being provided
with privileged access to the relative goal position. For the RL baseline, we train a PPO agent whose policy shares the same
architecture as the value network, except that it directly outputs the action mean and standard deviation. The PPO policy
is trained separately for each environment using 10 parallel environments and a total of 1M steps per environment. For
other baselines, including Uni-NaVid, NAVILA, NavDP, DualVLN, MobileVLA, and OmniVLA, we follow their respective
open-source implementations and training.
Ablation Action Policy Architectures. We implement the diffusion-based action policy as a conditional denoising model
over fixed-length action chunks of T = 30 steps. The forward diffusion process uses K = 100 noise steps with a cosine
variance schedule, and the denoiser is a Transformer backbone aligned with the query-based policy to ensure comparable
capacity. Noisy action tokens are augmented with timestep embeddings and positional encodings, while conditioning
information from the vision encoder and cached VLM hidden states is injected at every denoising layer via cross-attention.
Actions are normalized prior to training, and the model is trained with the standard denoising mean-squared-error objective
to predict clean actions. During inference, we apply DDIM sampling with 5 steps, which provides an efficient trade-off
between computation and trajectory quality while preserving multimodal behavior.
The flow-based action policy models the conditional distribution of action chunks using a normalizing flow with a standard
Gaussian base distribution, enabling exact likelihood optimization. The flow is composed of multiple coupling layers
with learned affine transformations, and each layer is conditioned on the same vision features and cached VLM hidden
states as the diffusion model to ensure architectural parity. Actions are standardized to zero mean and unit variance, and
training maximizes the conditional log-likelihood of expert demonstrations. At inference, action sequences are generated by
sampling from the Gaussian base and applying the inverse flow with 5 flow steps; reducing the number of steps leads to
noticeably degraded performance.
Simulation Settings. All experiments are conducted in a high-fidelity Isaac Sim simulator running at 30 Hz. The navigation
policy operates at a control frequency of 10 Hz; actions are applied once every three simulation frames and held constant in
between. Each episode is executed in an isolated process with a fresh simulator instance, ensuring clean initialization and
reproducibility. Episodes terminate when the robot reaches the goal (defined by a 2D distance threshold of 1.5 m) or when a
timeout is reached. Robot trajectories are recorded at the simulation rate to compute path length and SPL. Collisions are
detected both with animated human characters using distance proximity (threshold of 0.5 m) and with static scene objects
using a contact sensor. All metrics are aggregated across episodes and reported using standard navigation benchmarks.
Testing Settings. We employ a closed-loop simulator running at 30 Hz, while executing the policy at 10 Hz (every 3
19


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Algorithm 3 Closed-loop Rollout with Asynchronous VLM Reasoning
Require: Environment E (30 Hz), wrapper TIC-VLA, controller C, instruction I, goal g
1: s0 ←E.RESET()
2: image buffer B ←∅
3: reset episode state()
4: first kv ready ←False
5: (v0, ω0) ←(0, 0) {initial controls}
6: (vk, ωk) ←(v0, ω0)
7: for k = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
8:
posek ←E.OBSERVEPOSE()
9:
imgk ←E.RENDERCAMERA()
10:
append imgk to B
11:
if k mod 3 = 0 then
12:
(X act
k , X vlm
k
) ←SAMPLEFRAMESAVAILABLE(B)
13:
srobot
k
←[vx,k, vy,k, ωz,k] {robot state only; latency metadata is computed inside predict async}
14:
(rk, wk, kgen, kv ready, posegen) ←predict async(X act
k , X vlm
k
, I, srobot
k
, k, posek)
15:
if ¬ first kv ready ∧kv ready then
16:
first kv ready ←True
17:
end if
18:
if ¬ first kv ready then
19:
(v∗
k, ω∗
k) ←(0, 0)
20:
else
21:
(v∗
k, ω∗
k) ←C(wk)
22:
end if
23:
(vk, ωk) ←SMOOTH(v∗
k, ω∗
k)
24:
end if
25:
E.STEP(vk, ωk) {termination: success / timeout}
26: end for
simulation steps), as summarized in Algorithm 3. At each 10 Hz tick, the agent samples a short visual context Xk from
the image buffer using SAMPLEFRAMESAVAILABLE, which selects all available frames among the target offsets, e.g.,
{t −9, t −6, t −3, t}, and falls back to fewer frames when the full history is not yet available. Latency-aware metadata
(∆t, ∆x, ∆y, ∆θ) is computed inside predict async from the timestamp and pose associated with the cached VLM
state. The controller C then consumes the policy output wk to produce smoothed velocity commands (vk, ωk), and the
environment advances with E.STEP(vk, ωk).
Asynchronous inference. VLM reasoning and KV-cache extraction are executed asynchronously via predict async
(Algorithm 4), while the action policy continues to run at 10 Hz. Each call first polls the background VLM job and, if it has
completed, updates the cached response rcache, cached KV features kvcache, and the timestamp and pose associated with the
cached semantic state. If no generation is currently running, a new background generation job is launched using the VLM
visual context X vlm
k
and instruction I. While the new VLM job is in flight, the action policy reuses the most recent available
KV cache features to decode wk from the current observation, robot state, and latency metadata.
Synchronous inference. In the synchronous baseline, VLM inference is executed in a blocking manner, during which the
robot halts and no control commands are issued. At each decision step, the robot remains stationary while the VLM processes
the current visual context and instruction, ensuring that semantic reasoning is generated from up-to-date observations. As a
result, the effective semantic delay satisfies ∆t = 0, and the corresponding ego-motion offsets (∆x, ∆y, ∆θ) are all zero.
Once inference completes, the robot executes the predicted trajectory for a fixed horizon of 0.5 s, after which it again halts
for the next VLM inference cycle. This design eliminates semantic staleness but introduces intermittent control stalls due to
blocking inference.
Inference without reasoning. For ablations that remove explicit VLM reasoning, we keep the same closed-loop rollout
(Algorithm 3) and the same asynchronous interface (Algorithm 4), but disable VLM generation entirely. Concretely, the
background VLM job performs a forward pass on the visual-language input X vlm
k
and returns only the extracted KV cache;
20


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
no tokens are decoded, and the textual response is not produced. As a result, rk is always None, and control depends only
on the cached KV signal and current observations.
Latency control in simulation. We evaluate robustness under effective semantic delay, defined as the elapsed time between
observation capture and semantic state availability. To isolate the effect of delay, we keep the semantic model fixed and
vary the scheduling of semantic updates. The default asynchronous setting yields an average effective latency of about 2 s
with full semantic reasoning. For a lower-latency condition (1 s), we pause the simulation after 1 s of elapsed time and
resume it once VLM inference completes, yielding a reduced effective delay. For higher-latency settings (3-5 s), visual
observations are captured immediately, but VLM inference is launched after a delay of 30, 60, or 90 simulation frames
(30 Hz). During this period, the policy continues executing with the most recent cached semantics, and newly generated
responses and KV caches are applied immediately upon completion. This increases effective semantic delay without altering
simulation dynamics.
Algorithm 4 predict async (asynchronous VLM generation and action policy)
1: Function predict async(X act
k , X vlm
k
, I, srobot
k
, k, posek)
2: /* persistent internal state stored across calls */
3:
gen job {background VLM generation job, or None}
4:
kvcache {most recent extracted KV cache}
5:
rcache {most recent completed VLM response}
6:
kcache, posecache {step and pose associated with the cached KV}
7: POLLRUNNINGGENERATION(k) {if a background generation finishes, update kvcache, rcache, kcache, posecache}
8: kgen ←None
9: posegen ←None
10: if gen job is inactive then
11:
(kgen, posegen) ←(k, posek) {record when and where this generation starts}
12:
start background VLM generation using X vlm
k
, I, kgen, and posegen
13:
gen job becomes active
14: end if
15: if kvcache is undefined then
16:
kv ←None
17:
rk ←rcache
18:
kv ready ←False
19:
(∆t, ∆x, ∆y, ∆θ) ←(0, 0, 0, 0)
20: else
21:
kv ←kvcache
22:
rk ←rcache
23:
kv ready ←True
24:
∆t ←ELAPSEDTIME(k, kcache)
25:
(∆x, ∆y, ∆θ) ←RELATIVEPOSE(posecache, posek)
26: end if
27: wk ←πθ(EMBED(X act
k ), srobot
k
, kv, ∆t, ∆x, ∆y, ∆θ) {use current vision, robot state, cached semantic KV, and
latency metadata}
28: return (rk, wk, kgen, kv ready, posegen)
Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate navigation performance using standard goal-reaching metrics. Success (S) for a single
episode is defined as whether the robot reaches the goal within a 2D Euclidean distance threshold Tgoal = 1.5m:
S = I(∥pt,xy −gxy∥2 < Tgoal) ,
(6)
where pt,xy denotes the robot position at termination and gxy denotes the goal position. Success Rate (SR) is reported as
the average success over all testing episodes.
Navigation Error (NE) measures the final 2D distance to the goal:
NE = ∥pt,xy −gxy∥2.
(7)
21


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
Path Length (PL) is computed as the cumulative 2D distance traveled by the robot:
PL =
N−1
X
i=1
∥pi+1,xy −pi,xy∥2,
(8)
where {pi,xy}N
i=1 are robot positions.
Success weighted by Path Length (SPL) is defined as:
SPL = SR ·
dopt
max(dopt, PL),
(9)
where dopt is the shortest distance from the start position p0,xy to the goal.
Collision (C) is a binary episode-level indicator that equals 1 if any collision occurs during the episode and 0 otherwise:
C = I(∃t s.t. collisiont) ,
(10)
Collisions include contacts with both animated human agents and static scene objects. The Collision Rate (CR) is computed
as the fraction of test episodes in which at least one collision occurs.
Physical Robot Testing. We evaluate all methods on a Unitree Go2 quadruped robot. The primary computing setup consists
of a laptop equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 4060 GPU and an NVIDIA Jetson Orin NX mounted onboard. For baseline
methods whose memory or compute requirements exceed the capacity of these devices, we use a remote desktop equipped
with an NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. In this setup, the remote machine performs model inference and communicates with the
laptop that relays sensor observations and action commands to the robot.
E. Additional Results
Simulation Testing. We provide additional simulation testing results of TIC-VLA in diverse DynaNav environments,
including outdoor, hospital, and warehouse, using multiple robot platforms, in Figure 11. The results demonstrate that
TIC-VLA is able to generate coherent semantic reasoning under delayed perception and translate it into stable, low-level
control commands. The robot consistently adapts its behavior to dynamic agents by yielding, adjusting speed, and selecting
appropriate turning maneuvers, while following the given natural language instructions. To further illustrate temporal
consistency and closed-loop behavior, dynamic video results are provided.
Real-world Testing. Real-world Testing. We report task-specific results from real-world robot navigation experiments.
Each task is executed five times, and the average success rate (SR) is summarized in Table 10. As shown, TIC-VLA
consistently outperforms prior methods across both indoor and outdoor environments. Figure 12 presents three representative
real-world navigation examples under diverse conditions. To further demonstrate the closed-loop control behavior, we
provide additional dynamic video results on the project website.
Table 10. Real-world testing task-specific evaluation results.
Task
TIC-VLA SR (%)
DualVLN SR (%)
NaVILA SR (%)
Indoor Hallway
80
40
20
Indoor Office
80
20
0
Outdoor Campus
80
60
60
Outdoor Sidewalk
100
80
60
Average
85
50
35
Influence of Action Policy. Table 11 compares three action policy designs in TIC-VLA: diffusion-based, flow-based,
and query-based Transformer policies. Overall, we observe no performance benefit from the more complex diffusion and
flow-matching policies over a simple query-based Transformer. The query-based policy consistently achieves the best results
across all metrics. By directly predicting action sequences in a single forward pass, it minimizes inference latency and
preserves tight alignment between perception and control. Moreover, the simpler architecture facilitates more stable and
efficient RL fine-tuning.
22


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
t=3.2s
t=6.4s
t=16.0s
t=24.6s
t=29.5s
I am on a sidewalk beside a storefront, approaching an opening with a 
bench and umbrella stand. A person stands front-left near the umbrella 
pole. They seem stationary. I have been moving straight and have not 
turned yet. Next I should continue forward, begin a left turn down the 
ramp, and proceed toward the fountain while yielding.
Waypoints: (1.39, 0.30, 0.21), (3.10, 1.19, 0.37), (4.84, 2.39, 0.46)
I am on a plaza sidewalk beside storefronts, approaching a left-curving 
ramp toward the red triangular yield sign. A pedestrian is ahead-left near 
the ramp entrance. They likely continue along the sidewalk across my path. 
I have finished the forward approach and begun the left turn. Next I will 
slow, yield, turn left down the ramp, then continue toward the fountain.
Waypoints: (2.07, -0.01, -0.00), (4.14, -0.03, -0.01), (6.19, -0.38, -0.06)
I am in an open plaza at a junction by storefronts, with a red triangular yield 
sign and the fountain ahead-left. A construction worker is crossing ahead-
right. He likely continues right across my path. I have gone straight and 
begun the leftward approach. Next I should yield, then turn left down the 
ramp, descend carefully, and proceed toward the fountain.
Waypoints: (1.99, -0.18, -0.09), (3.99, -0.65, -0.16), (6.01, -1.00, -0.16)
t=48.4s
Continue 
forward, turn 
left to go down 
the ramp on the 
left side of the 
red triangular 
yield sign, then 
head toward 
the fountain.
Example 1
t=3.6s
t=11.6s
t=5.6s
t=8.1s
t=15.7s
t=23.3s
Go straight 
past the 
wheelchairs 
and stop at the 
water 
dispenser by 
the window.
Example 2
I am in a hospital hallway by windows with a wheelchair right and a person 
ahead. The pedestrian is the key obstacle and seems stationary. I have 
been moving forward with a slight left arc, continuing the straight segment. 
Next I go forward, veer right past the wheelchairs, yield if needed, and stop 
at the water fountain.
Waypoints: (1.29, -0.34, -0.26), (2.60, -0.65, -0.24), (3.93, -1.00, -0.25)
I am in a lobby by large windows, approaching the water-hydrant area with 
a wheelchair to my right and a person ahead. The wheelchair is the key 
obstacle and seems stationary. I have been moving straight with a slight 
left drift, passing the chairs. Next I continue forward, clear the wheelchair, 
yield if needed, and stop at the water fountain.
Waypoints: (1.00, -0.06, -0.06), (2.35, 0.14, 0.06), (3.69, 0.11, 0.03)
I am in a lobby by large windows, approaching the wood-paneled wall with 
a water water fountain ahead right. The fountain is the key obstacle and is 
stationary. I have been moving straight with a slight right drift, passing the 
water fountain. Next I continue forward, adjust right to align, slow, and stop 
by the fountain.
Waypoints: (1.32, 0.07, 0.05), (2.73, -0.06, -0.08), (4.02, -0.11, -0.11)
t=2.4s
t=7.1s
t=15.4s
t=18.3s
t=23.1s
t=43.3s
I am in a warehouse at the entrance to Aisle 01 with pedestrians nearby. 
The critical one is ahead-right crossing the aisle. They likely continue left 
across my path. I have just begun a gentle left entry. Next I will yield, then 
move forward with a slight left into Aisle 01 and continue to the end 
cautiously.
Waypoints: (1.84, 0.10, 0.05), (3.72, 0.61, 0.16), (4.73, 0.97, 0.20)
I am at the entrance of Aisle 01 in a warehouse, facing down the aisle. A 
pedestrian is ahead crossing left to right. They likely continue across my 
path. I have completed the left entry and begun straightening. I will yield, 
then proceed forward with a slight right alignment, continuing to the end at 
low speed.
Waypoints: (1.09, -0.00, -0.00), (2.84, -0.79, -0.27), (3.93, -1.35, -0.33)
I am at the entrance of Aisle 01 in a warehouse aisle, aligned with the aisle. 
A pedestrian is ahead-left near the entrance. They likely continue walking 
across the aisle. I have just completed a gentle rightward approach into this 
aisle. Next I should yield, then proceed straight down the aisle toward the 
end, keeping right and safe spacing.
Waypoints: (1.99, -0.57, -0.28), (2.99, -1.03, -0.33), (4.87, -1.83, -0.36)
Enter Aisle 01, 
the leftmost 
aisle, and 
continue to the 
end.
Example 3
Figure 11. Additional qualitative simulation results of TIC-VLA on the DynaNav benchmark. Rows correspond to different environment
types: top-outdoor, middle-hospital, and bottom-warehouse.
Table 11. Comparison of different action policies in the TIC-VLA model.
Policy Type
NE (↓)
SR (↑)
SPL (↑)
CR (↓)
Diffusion-based
14.30
38.82
35.41
41.18
Flow-based
15.04
32.94
29.65
45.88
Query-based (Ours)
10.85
47.06
42.41
34.12
Influence of VLM Backbone. We study the effect of VLM backbone scale and visual tokenization in TIC-VLA by
comparing InternVL3 (1B) with SmolVLM2 (Shukor et al., 2025) (500M) and Qwen2.5-VL (Bai et al., 2025) (3B), as
summarized in Table 12. The smaller SmolVLM2 benefits from lower inference latency but exhibits higher navigation
error and lower success and SPL due to limited representational capacity. In contrast, the larger Qwen2.5-VL provides
stronger visual understanding but incurs substantial inference delay, which degrades perception-action alignment and overall
navigation performance. InternVL3 achieves the best trade-off between capacity and efficiency.
Table 12. Comparison of VLM backbone in the TIC-VLA model.
Backbone
NE (↓)
SR (↑)
SPL (↑)
CR (↓)
SmolVLM2 (500M)
14.82
38.82
31.06
41.18
InternVL3 (1B)
10.85
47.06
42.41
34.12
Qwen2.5-VL (3B)
13.26
32.94
29.98
35.29
Influence of Action Expert Architecture. We evaluate the sensitivity of TIC-VLA to the depth of the Transformer action
expert by varying the number of cross-attention layers. All variants are evaluated without RL fine-tuning. As shown in
Table 13, the 6-layer design achieves the strongest overall performance. The 3-layer variant performs comparably but is
slightly weaker across most metrics, suggesting that a shallower action expert has limited capacity to integrate visual tokens,
semantic features, and latency metadata. Increasing the depth to 12 layers does not improve performance and leads to a
worse success rate, SPL, and collision rate despite a slightly lower navigation error. We therefore adopt the 6-layer action
expert as the default architecture.
Sensitivity to Odometry Drift. We further evaluate robustness by injecting Gaussian noise into translation and rotation
measurements during simulation. The noise magnitude is proportional to the traveled distance at each step and accumulates
23


Think-in-Control Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation in Dynamic Environments
(a)  Indoor Office
Time
Success
(b)  Outdoor Campus
Time
Success
(c) Outdoor Sidewalk
Time
Success
Success
Exit the room, go through the lobby, and enter the room with open door.
Walk toward the nearby vending machine.
Move along the sidewalk and stop when the sidewalk ends.
Figure 12. Real-world navigation examples demonstrating TIC-VLA executing language-conditioned navigation under real-time control.
Table 13. Effect of the number of cross-attention layers in the Transformer action expert.
Layers
NE (↓)
SR (↑)
SPL (↑)
CR (↓)
3
10.98
45.88
41.39
35.29
6 (ours)
10.85
47.06
42.41
34.12
12
10.73
44.71
40.77
37.64
over time, simulating realistic odometry drift. As shown in Table 14, TIC-VLA remains stable under typical drift conditions,
with only marginal changes in navigation error, success rate, and SPL. Even under the severe stress-test setting, the policy
continues to navigate successfully in a substantial portion of episodes, although performance degradation becomes more
apparent due to accumulated localization errors. These results suggest that TIC-VLA is reasonably robust to moderate
odometry inaccuracies and does not catastrophically fail under noisy motion estimation.
Table 14. Robustness of TIC-VLA under accumulated localization drift with Gaussian translation and rotation noise.
Drift Level Gaussian Noise (trans, rot) NE (↓)
SR (↑)
SPL (↑)
CR (↓)
None
–
10.55
55.29
50.29
28.24
Typical
(0.02 m/m, 1◦/m)
10.66
55.29
50.12
29.41
Severe
(0.05 m/m, 5◦/m)
11.87
43.53
38.41
35.29
24
