LiveVLN: Breaking the Stop-and-Go Loop in
Vision-Language Navigation
Xiangchen Wang1,*, Weiye Zhu1,*, Teng Wang1, TianTian Geng1,
Zekai Zhang1, Zhiyuan Qi1, Jinyu Yang2,†, Feng Zheng1,3,†
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
1 Southern University of Science and Technology
2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3 Spatialtemporal AI
Abstract—Recent navigation systems achieve strong bench-
mark results, yet real-world deployment often remains visibly
stop-and-go. This bottleneck arises because the sense-inference-
execution loop is still blocking: after each new observation, the
controller must wait for sensing, transmission, and inference
before motion can continue. Reducing action-generation cost
alone therefore does not remove redundant waiting. To address
this issue, we present LiveVLN, a training-free framework for
more continuous embodied navigation by augmenting pretrained
VLM navigators with multi-step action continuation. Instead of
pausing for each full sense-and-inference round, LiveVLN over-
laps execution with the processing of newly arrived observations,
allowing refreshed future actions to be handed off before the
current executable prefix is exhausted. This design keeps actions
continuously available during motion, reducing idle waiting and
enabling smoother online execution. The framework operates at
runtime and can be integrated with compatible pretrained VLM
navigators. Across R2R and RxR, LiveVLN preserves benchmark
performance while reducing waiting time and improving action
availability. In real-world deployments, it cuts average episode
waiting time by up to 77.7% and shortens wall-clock episode
time by 12.6% on StreamVLN and 19.6% on NaVIDA, yielding
more coherent execution during deployment. Code is available
at https://github.com/NIneeeeeem/LiveVLN.
Index Terms—Vision-Language Navigation, Continuous con-
trol, Streaming inference
I. INTRODUCTION
Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) studies how embod-
ied agents follow language instructions from egocentric vi-
sual observations [1]–[4]. Classical VLN systems built on
stronger cross-modal pretraining and Transformer-based rea-
soning, such as VLN-BERT [3] and DUET [4], have achieved
strong benchmark performance on tasks such as R2R and RxR.
More recent deployment-oriented work adopts video-VLM or
VLA-style architectures and brings VLN closer to continuous
embodied execution [5]–[7]. Although these advances improve
policy capability, they do not by themselves resolve the
runtime challenge of continuous execution. As a result, even
policies with strong benchmark performance may still exhibit
stop-and-go motion in streaming deployment.
The bottleneck is structural rather than purely computa-
tional. Most VLN systems still rely on a blocking three-
stage interface consisting of sense, inference, and execution, in
which the controller receives the next continuation only after
sensing, transmission, preprocessing, and action generation on
the latest observation are complete. If a continuation contains
k actions executed at frequency f, it supports only about k/f
Fig. 1. Blocking VLN serializes sense(S), inference(I), and execution(E). After
each action continuation, the robot pauses until the next sense-and-inference
round finishes. LiveVLN instead keeps the execution thread running on a short
guard buffer while the next sense-and-inference pass refreshes the following
continuation in the background.
seconds of motion, further reduced by controller-side execu-
tion overhead and communication jitter. Continuous execution
therefore depends on whether the next continuation arrives
before the current one is exhausted, exposing a direct trade-
off between action freshness and motion continuity. Real-
robot measurements show that this overhead is substantial. For
example, in a native NaVIDA [7] deployment, the controller
waits for 10.64 s per episode on average, which accounts for
a 30.5% waiting ratio, and the system exhibits a pause count
of 9.25.
To address this issue, we introduce LiveVLN, a training-
free runtime framework for continuous Vision-Language Nav-
igation. The key idea is to decouple the current execution
stage from the next sense and inference stages through a
short-horizon action state with three roles: executed actions,
a released guard buffer whose execution covers the next
hidden sense-and-inference pass, and a revisable tail that
remains unreleased until handoff. One thread keeps executing
the current guard buffer while the other thread refreshes
the next continuation from the newest observation. LiveVLN
combines two mechanisms: guarded handoff, which switches
to a refreshed continuation before the current guard buffer
arXiv:2604.19536v1  [cs.RO]  21 Apr 2026


is depleted, and real-time adaptation, under which the guard
budget is determined by recent sense-and-inference latency
(Fig. 1). In this way, only the minimal prefix necessary to
sustain continuous motion is committed, leaving later actions
open to revision based on newer observations. Operating
at runtime, the framework applies to compatible pretrained
VLM navigators that autoregressively decode multi-step action
continuations [5]–[9].
We evaluate this runtime framework in Vision-Language
Navigation in Continuous Environments (VLN-CE) bench-
marks and native streaming deployment across multiple com-
patible pretrained VLM navigators. Beyond task success,
we report continuity-oriented deployment metrics, including
waiting time, waiting ratio, visible gap, pause count, and
wall-clock episode duration, to examine whether the runtime
hides sense-and-inference latency in practice. Under matched
checkpoints, LiveVLN cuts waiting time by more than 70%
on both StreamVLN [6] and NaVIDA [7], shortens wall-clock
episode time by 12.6–19.6%, and markedly reduces pause
count, while preserving task performance in both simulation
and real-robot trials.
Our contributions are as follows:
1) We analyze why blocking VLN deployment leads to
stop-and-go motion, and we show through a real-robot
NaVIDA diagnosis that the waiting ratio still reaches
30.5% under the native runtime.
2) We introduce LiveVLN, a training-free runtime frame-
work for compatible pretrained VLM navigators that or-
ganizes execution into executed actions, a guard buffer,
and a revisable tail, enabling uninterrupted control
through guarded handoff and real-time adaptation.
3) Across VLN-CE and native streaming deployment with
StreamVLN and NaVIDA, LiveVLN reduces average
waiting time by 77.7% and 72.8% and shortens wall-
clock episode time by 12.6% and 19.6%, respectively,
while preserving benchmark performance.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
Blocking VLN deployment follows a serialized three-stage
cycle of sense, inference, and execution; real-robot measure-
ments confirm that this interface induces stop-and-go behavior.
A. Temporal Analysis of Blocking Deployment
Given a language instruction x and an online observation
stream {or}, blocking deployment repeats three serialized
stages in inference round r: sense captures the newest ob-
servation, inference maps it to the next action continuation,
and execution consumes the released actions on the controller.
Let
br = [a(1)
r , a(2)
r , . . . , a(Hr)
r
],
(1)
denote the continuation released after the round-r sense-and-
inference pass, where Hr is its length and a(i)
r
is its i-th action
unit. If the controller has already issued or executed the first pr
actions, with pr ∈{0, . . . , Hr}, then the remaining executable
suffix is
brem
r
= [a(pr+1)
r
, . . . , a(Hr)
r
].
(2)
Waiting Times
Ratio: 30.5%
Stop-and-go
Ratio: 94.9%
 
 
Fig. 2.
Native blocking NaVIDA diagnosis on Unitree G1. The waiting
ratio reaches 30.5%, while 94.9% of inference rounds exhibit stop-and-go
behavior.
During the next round’s sense-and-inference stage, this suffix
is the controller’s only executable buffer. Continuous motion
requires the next continuation to arrive before the current
execution buffer is exhausted; otherwise, the controller idles.
Stop-and-go behavior reflects a timing mismatch between
serialized sense-and-inference latency and the remaining exe-
cution budget.
For each episode, the wall-clock duration is decomposed as
Tepisode = Texecution + Twait,
ηwait =
Twait
Tepisode
,
(3)
where Texecution is the cumulative execution time and Twait
is the exposed sense and inference time during which no
executable action is available. Each round is timestamped on
the robot client at five events: sending the newest sensed
observation (tsend), receiving the server response (trecv),
exhausting the current execution queue (tempty), issuing the
first action from the refreshed queue (tissue), and finishing that
control step (tdone). These timestamps define the continuity
metrics: inference latency ℓinfer = trecv −tsend, visible gap
ℓgap = tissue −tempty, first resumed execution-step duration
ℓexecution = tdone −tissue, and interrupted-round duration
ℓtotal = tdone −tempty = ℓgap + ℓexecution. Npause counts
rounds with ℓgap > 0.5 s. Applying these definitions to the
diagnostic study reveals a 30.5% waiting ratio and frequent
stop-and-go interruptions.
B. Real-Robot Diagnostic Study
The diagnostic study uses a controlled NaVIDA deployment
on a Unitree G1 robot with a front-facing Intel RealSense
D455f camera and monocular RGB input. The robot performs
sense and low-level execution, while a remote server with an
NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPU performs high-level inference and
returns the next action continuation through the motion-control
API. Episode-level waiting and per-round discontinuity are
measured on this system.


Thread A
Short-horizon Action State
Executed
Actions
Guard
Buffer
Revisable
Tail
Committed
Revisable
Thread B
Forward
50 cm
Left
30 degree
Forward
25 cm
Left
30 degree
Forward
50 cm
Right
30 degree
Navigation Route
Suffix
Generation
Cross thread prefix 
Thread B
Thread A
Thread B
Action Execution
Fig. 3. Overview of LiveVLN when the next update arrives before the current guard buffer is exhausted. The short-horizon action state contains executed
actions, a guard buffer, and a revisable tail. Thread A keeps the current guard buffer in execution, while Thread B uses the newest sensed observation to run
inference for the next continuation. At handoff, the current guard buffer becomes executed actions, the refreshed prefix becomes the next guard buffer, and
the trailing tail remains revisable for correction after the next observation arrives.
a) Episode-Level Evidence: Average waiting is 10.64 s
per episode, corresponding to a 30.5% waiting ratio. The
controller experiences 9.25 pauses over 9.75 inference rounds
on average, so 94.9% of rounds are stop-and-go. Native
blocking NaVIDA spends nearly one third of a typical episode
in waiting time instead of continuous execution.
b) Per-Round Discontinuity Evidence: After the current
queue is exhausted, the controller waits 1.09 s on average
before motion resumes. This visible gap is close to the 0.97 s
inference round trip, so most of the sense-and-inference pass
remains visible to the robot. Once the refreshed action arrives,
the first resumed execution step lasts 2.49 s on average. Native
blocking deployment therefore produces frequent, roughly
one-second stalls. StreamVLN exhibits the same qualitative
pattern under the same deployment protocol (Table II).
These results motivate a dual-thread runtime that overlaps
sense and inference with execution while preserving a short-
horizon action state composed of executed actions, a guard
buffer, and a revisable tail for online revision.
III. METHOD
LiveVLN mitigates stop-and-go deployment without chang-
ing the pretrained VLN policy. It replaces the serialized sense-
inference-execution interface with a dual-thread runtime that
lets execution continue during the next sense-and-inference
pass. At each round, the controller keeps executing the current
guard buffer while a background inference thread refreshes
a new continuation in parallel; if the refresh finishes be-
fore the guard is exhausted, handoff moves that guard into
executed actions, promotes the refreshed prefix to the next
guard buffer, and leaves the remaining tail revisable. Given
an autoregressive navigator B that emits multi-step executable
continuations, the runtime uses two coupled mechanisms.
Guarded handoff with a revisable tail organizes each short-
horizon action state into executed actions, a guard buffer, and
a revisable tail, while real-time adaptation sizes that guard
buffer against deployment latency across compatible pretrained
VLM navigators. LiveVLN treats B as a continuation gener-
ator conditioned on the current guard buffer and defines the
corresponding handoff and release rules.
At inference round t, sense provides the newest observa-
tion, inference predicts the next continuation, and execution
consumes the current guard buffer on the controller. Relative
to Sec. II, the continuation br is now written as ut and split
into executed actions et, guard buffer gt, and revisable tail
rt. Let ct denote the full conditioning context at inference
round t (instruction, current observation, and any model-
specific history input), and let ut = [a(1)
t , . . . , a(Ht)
t
] denote
the continuation predicted by B. The runtime never exposes
all of ut at once: it releases only the committed prefix needed
for continuity and keeps the remaining tail revisable until
the next handoff. The next refresh is therefore conditioned
on the already committed guard buffer gt = [a(1)
t , . . . , a(k)
t
]
rather than on the still-revisable tail. The backbone’s native
autoregressive factorization is unchanged; only the runtime
handoff boundary exposed to the controller moves.
A. Guarded Handoff with a Revisable Tail
LiveVLN targets compatible pretrained VLM navigators
that infer multi-step action continuations autoregressively dur-
ing online execution. The navigator must (i) take the latest
sensed observation and the already committed guard buffer as
inference inputs, and (ii) emit an ordered multi-step sequence
of executable action units, where each unit may be a primitive
action or a controller-accepted macro-action. Recent VLM-
style VLN systems satisfy these assumptions and already
use multi-step action continuations [5]–[9]. The handoff rule
depends only on the emitted continuation, not on backbone-
specific architectural design or retraining.
In streaming deployment, the instruction remains fixed
throughout the episode and visual observations arrive sequen-


tially during motion. The runtime controller maintains the
following short-horizon interface state
qt = [et | gt | rt],
(4)
which decomposes the current short-horizon state into three
runtime roles: executed actions, a guard buffer, and a revisable
tail.
Equivalently, the same continuation is viewed as already
executed actions, a currently executable guard buffer, and a
still-hidden revisable tail.
a) Executed Actions: et records the actions that have
been executed in the current short-horizon state. It excludes
earlier episode history and tracks only what has been con-
sumed since the latest handoff.
b) Guard Buffer: gt is the released guard buffer cur-
rently held by the controller. It provides the continuity budget
that keeps motion ongoing while the next hidden sense-and-
inference pass runs in the background.
c) Revisable Tail: rt is the unreleased tail still held by the
background inference thread. Because it has not been released
to the controller, it can be replaced by a refreshed inference
result from newer observations. The boundary between gt and
rt separates committed actions from revisable actions.
At round t, Thread A keeps executing the released guard
buffer gt without interruption, while Thread B uses the newest
sensed observation ot+1 to refresh the continuation for the
next handoff. The next handoff succeeds only if this Thread-
B sense-and-inference pass finishes before the current guard
buffer is exhausted. Thread B computes the refreshed contin-
uation as
ˆut+1 = DB(ot+1, gt; rt),
(5)
where DB denotes the backbone-specific continuation genera-
tor. The length Ht+1 may be fixed or round-dependent. Here
gt is the committed context that must survive the handoff,
whereas rt is the revisable tail and may be overwritten by
the refresh. The released guard buffer gt keeps the controller
in execution while the background inference thread completes
the next sense-and-inference pass.
At handoff, the current guard buffer is fully executed, so
et+1 = gt and the refreshed continuation is split into qt+1 =
[et+1 | gt+1 | rt+1]. The guard buffer in round t becomes
executed actions in round t + 1, the refreshed prefix becomes
the next guard buffer, and the remaining tail stays revisable
until the following refresh.
B. Real-Time Adaptation and Transferability
The controller must retain executable actions while the
next sense-and-inference pass runs in the background. Because
primitive actions and macro-actions can occupy the controller
for very different durations, the guard is sized in wall-clock
time rather than in action counts. The scheduler therefore
seeks the shortest released prefix whose predicted execution
can cover the next hidden refresh.
Algorithm 1 Core pipeline of LiveVLN
Require: qt = [et | gt | rt], ot+1, ˜ℓt,SI, α, δ, and T guard
t
Ensure: candidate split ˆut+1 = [ˆgt+1 | ˆrt+1]
▷[Sec. III-A] Background refresh
1: Keep executing gt while running ˆut+1 ←DB(ot+1, gt; rt)
2: Measure the resulting sense-and-inference latency ℓt,SI
▷[Sec. III-B] Real-time adaptation
3: ˜ℓt+1,SI ←(1 −α)˜ℓt,SI + αℓt,SI
4: ψt+1 ←˜ℓt+1,SI + δ
5: Choose k⋆
t+1 = min{k : T (k)
t+1 ≥ψt+1}
6: Split ˆut+1 into ˆgt+1 and ˆrt+1 = ˆu
(>k⋆
t+1)
t+1
▷[Sec. III-B] Release and backup action
7: Check whether ℓt,SI ≤T guard
t
8: If true, release ˆgt+1 and keep ˆrt+1 revisable; otherwise trigger a
backup action or STOP
Given the refreshed continuation ˆut+1, each action unit
a has an estimated controller-side execution time τ(a). The
predicted total execution time for the first k actions in ˆut+1 is
T (k)
t+1 =
k
X
i=1
τ(ˆa(i)
t+1).
(6)
If the next hidden sense-and-inference pass is expected to
require a time budget ψt+1, the next guard is the shortest prefix
whose cumulative execution time can cover that budget:
k⋆
t+1 = min
n
k ∈{1, . . . , Ht+1} | T (k)
t+1 ≥ψt+1
o
,
(7)
with k⋆
t+1 = Ht+1 if no shorter prefix satisfies the condition.
The resulting split is ˆut+1 = [ˆgt+1 | ˆrt+1], where ˆgt+1 is
the next guard buffer and ˆrt+1 is the revisable tail. Only the
shortest future prefix needed to preserve continuity is exposed,
while the remaining tail stays available for correction from
newer observations.
Real-time adaptation comes from updating ψt+1 according
to recent sense-and-inference latency. After round t, we update
a running latency estimate and the next guard budget as
˜ℓt+1,SI = (1 −α)˜ℓt,SI + αℓt,SI,
ψt+1 = ˜ℓt+1,SI + δ, (8)
where α ∈(0, 1] is the update factor and δ ≥0 is a safety
margin. The exponential average follows latency drift while
smoothing single-round noise.
The adaptive scheduler sizes the round-(t + 1) guard buffer
for the next hidden sense-and-inference pass. For the current
round, continuity depends on whether the ongoing background
inference finishes before the already released guard buffer is
exhausted. Let ℓt,SI be the latency of the current background
sense-and-inference pass and let T guard
t
be the predicted
execution time of the currently released guard buffer. Seamless
handoff requires
ℓt,SI ≤T guard
t
.
(9)
When the condition holds, the system releases ˆgt+1 and
retains ˆrt+1 as the revisable tail. If the background pass
misses the guard deadline but a previously validated one-step
backup action still covers the overrun, the controller emits


TABLE I
RGB-ONLY VLN-CE RESULTS ON R2R AND RXR V A L_U N S E E N. METRICS INCLUDE NAVIGATION ERROR (NE), ORACLE SUCCESS (OS), SUCCESS RATE
(SR), SUCCESS WEIGHTED BY PATH LENGTH (SPL), AND NORMALIZED DYNAMIC TIME WARPING (NDTW). ROWS MARKED “+ LIVEVLN” USE THE
SAME PRETRAINED CHECKPOINT WITH OUR TRAINING-FREE RUNTIME. † DENOTES EXTRA NAVIGATION DATA, AND - MEANS UNREPORTED.
Method
R2R val_unseen
RxR val_unseen
NE ↓OS ↑SR ↑SPL ↑NE ↓SR ↑SPL ↑nDTW ↑
NaVid [5]
5.47
49.1
37.4
35.9
–
–
–
–
MapNav [10]
4.93
53.0
39.7
37.2
–
–
–
–
NaViLA [8]
5.37
57.6
49.7
45.5
–
–
–
–
NaViLA† [8]
5.22
62.5
54.0
49.0
6.77
49.3
44.0
58.8
UniNaVid† [9]
5.58
53.3
47.0
42.7
6.24
48.7
40.9
–
StreamVLN [6]
5.43
62.5
52.8
47.2
6.72
48.6
42.5
60.2
StreamVLN† [6]
4.90
63.6
56.4
50.2
5.65
54.4
45.4
63.7
+ LiveVLN† (training-free)
4.84
64.4
57.2
50.0
5.48
53.7
44.5
63.0
NaVIDA [7]
4.32
69.5
61.4
54.7
5.23
57.4
49.6
67.0
+ LiveVLN (training-free)
4.51
67.8
59.9
53.9
5.22
56.7
49.2
67.3
that backup action; otherwise it emits STOP. Continuity is
therefore adjusted online rather than by a fixed offline horizon.
The same rule transfers across compatible pretrained VLM
navigators and robot platforms. The runtime estimates the
next sense-and-inference latency, releases the shortest prefix
as the next guard buffer whose execution time covers that
delay, and keeps the remainder as the revisable tail using only
continuation output and action-timing estimates. No backbone-
specific retraining, architectural change, or fixed action horizon
is required beyond the interface in Sec. III-A. Moving to
another compatible navigator or embodiment mainly requires
re-estimating τ(·) and measuring the local sense-and-inference
latency; the guarded-handoff and adaptive-release logic re-
mains unchanged.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate LiveVLN from three perspectives: simulation
task performance, deployment continuity under native real-
robot streaming, and ablations. Simulation results are re-
ported on R2R and RxR val_unseen. Real-robot results
are measured with a shared client-side timing protocol and
cover continuity, wall-clock efficiency, and whether the final
stopping position falls within 2 m of the ground-truth goal.
A. Experimental Setup
We evaluate VLN-CE on R2R and RxR val_unseen
under the same streaming interface. For StreamVLN and
NaVIDA [6], [7], all comparisons use the same checkpoints
and deployment settings as their native runtimes. Table I
reports the standard R2R/RxR metrics [1], [2]: navigation error
(NE), oracle success (OS), success rate (SR), success weighted
by path length (SPL), and normalized dynamic time warp-
ing (nDTW), which respectively measure endpoint accuracy,
whether the path ever reaches the goal region, final success,
success under path-efficiency weighting, and trajectory-path
fidelity. For StreamVLN, both the offline and real-robot results
use the stronger extra-navigation-data checkpoint.
For the real-robot study, both navigators are deployed on the
same Unitree G1 client-server platform in a shared scene, with
Wi-Fi jitter remaining within 50 ms during collection. Each
navigator is evaluated for 40 runs (8 instructions × 5 rep-
etitions). Table II reports episode- and round-level continuity
metrics together with wall-clock episode time and whether the
robot’s final stopping position falls within 2 m of the ground-
truth goal.
Because the two navigators expose different native action
primitives and sense-and-inference cadences, we keep each
method in its intended runtime configuration. For StreamVLN
[6], the native runtime decodes and executes a 4-action con-
tinuation per round, whereas LiveVLN releases only a short
guard buffer and updates the revisable tail online; τ(a) is there-
fore the fixed action duration implied by the control frequency.
On the real robot, considering this inference-execution timing
pattern and StreamVLN’s reuse of KV-cache states across
multi-turn decoding, we fix the guard buffer to two actions and
place those two actions in the execution buffer at each handoff.
For NaVIDA, each action unit is a native controller chunk
rather than a fixed-duration primitive, so LiveVLN commits
the shortest prefix whose predicted execution covers the next
hidden sense-and-inference budget, with τ(a) estimated from
empirical controller-side durations.
B. Main Results
Table I shows that LiveVLN preserves benchmark navi-
gation quality while changing only the runtime framework.
Across both StreamVLN and NaVIDA, the wrapped runtime
stays close to the native checkpoint, with only small and mixed
fluctuations on R2R and RxR. This pattern indicates that the
gains below come from the runtime framework rather than
from retraining or stronger benchmark scores.
Table II shows a much larger effect in real-robot streaming.
Across both navigators, LiveVLN reduces waiting time by
more than 70%, markedly reduces pause count, and shortens
wall-clock episode time from 41.98 s to 36.71 s on StreamVLN
and from 34.90 s to 28.06 s on NaVIDA. Meanwhile, success
under the “stop within 2 m of the ground-truth goal” criterion
remains comparable, indicating that the main gain comes from


TABLE II
REAL-ROBOT CONTINUITY AND EFFICIENCY FOR NATIVE STREAMVLN AND NAVIDA VERSUS THEIR LIVEVLN WRAPPERS UNDER MATCHED ROBOT,
SCENE, AND CHECKPOINTS. UP ARROWS INDICATE HIGHER-IS-BETTER METRICS, AND DOWN ARROWS INDICATE LOWER-IS-BETTER METRICS.
Method
Episode-level
Per-round timing
¯
Nround
¯Texecution
¯Twait ↓
¯Tepisode ↓
¯ηwait ↓
¯
Npause ↓
Stop within 2 m ↑
¯ℓinfer ↓
¯ℓgap ↓
¯ℓexecution
¯ℓtotal ↓
StreamVLN
7.60
34.66
7.32
41.98
17.4%
6.75
15/40
0.81
0.96
4.56
5.52
StreamVLN + LiveVLN
14.80
35.08
1.63
36.71
4.4%
0.80
16/40
0.52
0.11
2.37
2.48
NaVIDA
9.75
24.26
10.64
34.90
30.5%
9.25
12/40
0.97
1.09
2.49
3.58
NaVIDA + LiveVLN
18.25
25.17
2.89
28.06
10.3%
1.20
12/40
0.61
0.16
1.38
1.54
TABLE III
NAVIDA ABLATION ON SIMULATION AND REAL-ROBOT CONTINUITY.
¯
Nround DENOTES AVERAGE INFERENCE ROUNDS PER EPISODE.
Variant
R2R SR ↑¯
Nround ¯ηwait ↓¯
Npause ↓
Native blocking reference
61.4
9.75
30.5%
9.25
Blocking w/ more rounds
61.0
18.50
52.2%
17.75
Full LiveVLN
59.9
18.25
10.3%
1.20
LiveVLN w/o revisable tail
57.6
16.50
15.6%
2.25
LiveVLN w/o real-time adaptation
60.3
19.75
18.4%
3.00
the runtime framework rather than from a change in endpoint
capability.
The per-round timing statistics support the same interpreta-
tion. With LiveVLN, the visible gap drops from about one
second to about one tenth of a second, while the number
of inference rounds increases substantially. For StreamVLN,
the real-robot numbers also explain why the fixed two-action
guard is the right operating point: one atomic action lasts about
1.14 s on average, so a two-action guard covers about 2.28 s of
controller time, whereas the hidden inference round takes only
0.52 s on average. A single-action guard would leave much
less slack once sensing, communication jitter, and handoff
overhead are included, while a longer fixed guard would
unnecessarily shrink the revisable tail and weaken online
correction. In other words, more frequent refresh becomes
useful only when it is hidden behind committed execution
instead of being exposed as repeated blocking stalls.
Figure 4 qualitatively corroborates Table II. Under the
same instruction and wall-clock budget, LiveVLN maintains
sustained motion and reaches the goal region, whereas the
native blocking StreamVLN runtime still exhibits stop-and-go
behavior and remains visibly farther from the target.
C. Ablation Study
Table III focuses on inference rounds, waiting ratio, and
pause count, with R2R val_unseen SR included as a
stability reference. The first comparison shows that increasing
refresh frequency alone does not solve the deployment prob-
lem. Relative to the native blocking reference, Blocking w/
more rounds nearly doubles the average inference frequency
from 9.75 to 18.50, yet the waiting ratio rises from 30.5%
to 52.2%. By contrast, full LiveVLN runs at a similarly high
inference frequency while reducing the waiting ratio to 10.3%
and the pause count to 1.20. The key difference is therefore
not how often the system refreshes, but whether refresh is
overlapped with execution so that the updated prefix is handed
off before the committed actions are exhausted.
The component ablations further clarify which part of the
design provides which benefit. Removing the revisable tail
weakens both task stability and continuity, indicating that the
hidden tail remains important after part of the continuation
has already been committed. Removing real-time adaptation
shows a different pattern: SR remains comparable, but the
waiting ratio rises to 18.4% and the pause count to 3.00. Taken
together, these results suggest that the revisable tail primarily
preserves adaptability, whereas real-time adaptation primarily
preserves continuity by matching the released guard budget to
the latency of the next hidden refresh. This is also why the
fixed StreamVLN setting keeps exactly two guard actions: it
is the smallest practical committed prefix that safely exceeds
the measured hidden refresh budget on the robot, whereas
NaVIDA uses the same rule in wall-clock form by selecting
the shortest controller chunk prefix whose predicted execution
covers the next inference pass.
D. Discussion
a) Real-Robot Continuity Depends Strongly on How Run-
time Latency Is Exposed: The main difference between the
native runtime and LiveVLN is not policy quality but how
sense-and-inference latency is presented to the controller.
When that latency is exposed directly, the robot experiences
visible stop-and-go motion; when it is hidden behind commit-
ted execution, motion becomes substantially more continuous
without materially changing benchmark performance.
b) Asynchronous Overlap Alone Is Not Enough: The
ablation study shows that the gain does not come from issuing
more refreshes by itself. Full LiveVLN achieves the best
continuity, whereas removing either the revisable tail or real-
time adaptation weakens performance. The two components
also play different roles: the revisable tail contributes more to
preserving task success, while real-time adaptation contributes
more directly to hiding latency. Continuity therefore improves
only when refresh is paired with a revisable tail and a real-
time guard budget, so that new evidence can still update the
tail without re-exposing the controller to a blocking stall.
c) Efficiency Gains Remain Bounded By Physical Execu-
tion: Reducing waiting time also shortens episode time, but
the effect is limited since physical execution still dominates.
This bounded episode-time gain is expected from the decom-
position above: LiveVLN reduces Twait without speeding up


2s
2s
6s
6s
10s
10s
14s
14s
Fig. 4. Real-robot deployment in the shared office scene for the instruction
“turn left until you see the green chair, walk to the green chair, and stop
beside it.” Top: native blocking StreamVLN. Bottom: LiveVLN under the
same setup. LiveVLN moves more continuously and completes the task in
14 s, while native StreamVLN remains visibly farther from the goal under the
same wall-clock budget overall.
the physical execution component Texecution. This explains
why the continuity gain is large while the episode-time gain
is more moderate.
d) Implication For Deployment-Oriented VLN Evalua-
tion: Taken together, deployment-oriented VLN should evalu-
ate not only endpoint success but also whether actions remain
continuously available at execution time. Two systems with
similar benchmark SR can produce noticeably different robot
behavior if one exhibits a higher pause count. Our findings
therefore support treating continuity-related timing measures
as first-class deployment metrics alongside standard navigation
benchmarks such as SR and SPL.
V. RELATED WORK
A. Vision-Language Navigation
VLN began with instruction-following benchmarks such
as R2R and RxR [1], [2], and early progress focused on
improving next-action prediction through stronger ground-
ing, large-scale pretraining, and richer history modeling [3],
[11]–[13]. Subsequent work introduced more explicit spatial
structure and longer-horizon reasoning, for example through
topological planning, dual-scale graph reasoning, and map-
centric representations [4], [14]–[16]. As VLN evolved from
discrete viewpoints to continuous environments, the problem
also became more operational: low-level embodiment exposes
control drift, recovery difficulty, and timing effects that are
only weakly reflected in stepwise evaluation [17], [18]. More
recent scaling and LLM-assisted approaches further expanded
the design space by increasing training diversity and explicit
reasoning capacity [19], [20].
Recent work has moved VLN closer to online embodied
deployment. NaVid uses a video-based VLM for continuous
instruction following [5], while StreamVLN improves online
action prediction through streaming context management, in-
cluding a multi-rate context design and KV-cache reuse [6].
NaVILA further couples a navigation-oriented VLA with a
real-time locomotion policy for legged robots [8]. NaVIDA
strengthens action-grounded visual dynamics with inverse-
dynamics augmentation and adaptive action-continuation ex-
ecution [7], and JanusVLN improves RGB-only VLN with a
decoupled semantic-spatial design that supports efficient incre-
mental updates [21]. On the training side, ActiveVLN studies
active exploration through multi-turn reinforcement learning
for VLN post-training [22], and SACA introduces step-aware
dense supervision to improve credit assignment in VLN-CE
optimization [23]. These efforts move VLN closer to online
deployment, but they mainly strengthen policy capability,
representation quality, or training signals. A separate question
is how such policies should be executed under latency, stream-
ing observations, and controller-side safety constraints. Our
work targets that runtime level through a training-free runtime
framework rather than proposing another policy architecture
or post-training method.
B. Streaming VLMs and Live Video Understanding
Broader multimodal modeling has recently shifted from
offline video understanding toward streaming and live interac-
tion. Recent work spans long-video modeling for preserving
temporal context over pre-collected videos [24], [25], native
streaming systems that update context and respond continu-
ously as frames arrive [26]–[28], and training or evaluation
efforts that better expose live multimodal behavior, such as
large-scale streaming supervision in LiveCC and streaming-
video benchmarks such as StreamingBench [29], [30]. Parallel
real-time inference has also been identified as a core re-
quirement for genuine live understanding rather than post-hoc
response generation [31]. Together, these studies suggest that
live multimodal systems require persistent state, incremental
updates, and non-blocking inference.
Embodied navigation shares these requirements, but adds a
control constraint: actions must remain executable while exe-
cution itself changes future observations. The setting therefore
lies between streaming multimodal inference and receding-
horizon control, where partial action continuations can be
exposed early and refreshed as observations evolve [32], [33].
From this perspective, LiveVLN is closer to a receding-
horizon execution interface than to live video captioning,
because it commits a short safe prefix, refreshes the remainder
asynchronously, and replans as observations evolve.
VI. CONCLUSION
We presented LiveVLN, a training-free runtime framework
that keeps executable actions available while refreshing fu-
ture continuations online. After integration with compatible
pretrained VLM navigators, benchmark performance on R2R
and RxR remains close to the native runtime, while real-robot
deployment improves substantially: waiting time drops by
more than 70%, pause count is greatly reduced, and wall-clock
episode time is shortened. Taken together, these results suggest
that stop-and-go VLN behavior is not only a policy-quality
issue but also a runtime issue. They also motivate treating


continuity and navigation efficiency as first-class deployment
objectives alongside standard navigation benchmarks such as
SR and SPL, rather than as secondary runtime details.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Anderson, Q. Wu, D. Teney, J. Bruce, M. Johnson, N. Sünderhauf,
I. Reid, S. Gould, and A. van den Hengel, “Vision-and-language
navigation: Interpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real
environments,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 3674–3683.
[2] A. Ku, P. Anderson, R. Patel, E. Ie, and J. Baldridge, “Room-
across-room: Multilingual vision-and-language navigation with dense
spatiotemporal grounding,” in Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2020, pp. 4392–
4412.
[3] Y. Hong, Q. Wu, Y. Qi, C. Rodriguez-Opazo, and S. Gould, “VLN
BERT: A recurrent vision-and-language BERT for navigation,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2021, pp. 1643–1653.
[4] S. Chen, P.-L. Guhur, M. Tapaswi, C. Schmid, and I. Laptev, “Think
global, act local: Dual-scale graph transformer for vision-and-language
navigation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 16 537–16 547.
[5] J. Zhang, K. Wang, R. Xu, G. Zhou, Y. Hong, X. Fang, Q. Wu, Z. Zhang,
and H. Wang, “NaVid: Video-based VLM plans the next step for vision-
and-language navigation,” in Robotics: Science and Systems, 2024.
[6] M. Wei, C. Wan, X. Yu, T. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Mao, C. Zhu, W. Cai,
H. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Liu, and J. Pang, “StreamVLN: Streaming
vision-and-language navigation via slowfast context modeling,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.05240, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2507.05240
[7] W. Zhu, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, H. Pan, T. Wang, T. Geng, R. Xu,
and F. Zheng, “NaVIDA: Vision-language navigation with inverse
dynamics
augmentation,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2601.18188,
2026.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.18188
[8] A.-C. Cheng, Y. Ji, Z. Yang, Z. Gongye, X. Zou, J. Kautz, E. Biyik,
H. Yin, S. Liu, and X. Wang, “NaVILA: Legged robot vision-language-
action model for navigation,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and
Systems, Los Angeles, CA, USA, June 2025.
[9] J. Zhang, K. Wang, S. Wang, M. Li, H. Liu, S. Wei, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang,
and H. Wang, “Uni-NaVid: A video-based vision-language-action model
for unifying embodied navigation tasks,” in Proceedings of Robotics:
Science and Systems, Los Angeles, CA, USA, June 2025. [Online].
Available: https://roboticsconference.org/program/papers/13/
[10] L.
Zhang,
X.
Hao,
Q.
Xu,
Q.
Zhang,
X.
Zhang,
P.
Wang,
J. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, and R. Xu, “MapNav: A novel
memory representation via annotated semantic maps for VLM-based
vision-and-language navigation,” in Proceedings of the 63rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers).
Vienna, Austria: Association for Computational
Linguistics,
2025,
pp.
13 032–13 056.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.638/
[11] X. Wang, Q. Huang, A. Celikyilmaz, J. Gao, D. Shen, Y.-F. Wang,
W. Y. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Reinforced cross-modal matching and
self-supervised imitation learning for vision-language navigation,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 6629–6638.
[12] W. Hao, C. Li, X. Li, L. Carin, and J. Gao, “Towards learning a
generic agent for vision-and-language navigation via pre-training,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 13 137–13 146.
[13] S. Chen, P.-L. Guhur, C. Schmid, and I. Laptev, “History aware multi-
modal transformer for vision-and-language navigation,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
[14] K. Chen, J. K. Chen, J. Chuang, M. Vazquez, and S. Savarese, “Topo-
logical planning with transformers for vision-and-language navigation,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 11 276–11 286.
[15] C. Huang, O. Mees, A. Zeng, and W. Burgard, “Visual language maps
for robot navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05714, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.05714
[16] D. An, H. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, K. He, and L. Wang,
“ETPNav: Evolving topological planning for vision-language navigation
in continuous environments,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 5130–5145, 2025.
[17] J. Krantz, E. Wijmans, A. Majumdar, D. Batra, and S. Lee, “Beyond the
nav-graph: Vision-and-language navigation in continuous environments,”
in Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, 2020, pp. 104–120.
[18] Y. Hong, Z. Wang, Q. Wu, and S. Gould, “Bridging the gap be-
tween learning in discrete and continuous environments for vision-and-
language navigation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 15 439–15 449.
[19] Z. Wang, J. Li, Y. Hong, Y. Wang, Q. Wu, M. Bansal, S. Gould,
H. Tan, and Y. Qiao, “Scaling data generation in vision-and-language
navigation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), October 2023, pp. 12 009–12 020.
[20] G. Zhou, Y. Hong, and Q. Wu, “NavGPT: Explicit reasoning in vision-
and-language navigation with large language models,” in Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
[21] S. Zeng, D. Qi, X. Chang, F. Xiong, S. Xie, X. Wu, S. Liang,
M. Xu, X. Wei, and N. Guo, “JanusVLN: Decoupling semantics
and
spatiality
with
dual
implicit
memory
for
vision-language
navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22548, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.22548
[22] Z.
Zhang,
W.
Zhu,
H.
Pan,
X.
Wang,
R.
Xu,
X.
Sun,
and
F. Zheng, “ActiveVLN: Towards active exploration via multi-turn rl
in vision-and-language navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.12618,
2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.12618
[23] H. Li, R. Liu, H. Fan, and Y. Yang, “Let’s reward step-by-step:
Step-aware contrastive alignment for vision-language navigation in
continuous environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.09740, 2026.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.09740
[24] Y. Zhang, J. Wu, W. Li, B. Li, Z. Ma, Z. Liu, and C. Li, “LLaVA-Video:
Video instruction tuning with synthetic data,” Transactions on Machine
Learning Research, 2025.
[25] R. Qian, X. Dong, P. Zhang, Y. Zang, S. Ding, D. Lin, and J. Wang,
“Streaming long video understanding with large language models,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[26] J. Chen, Z. Lv, S. Wu, K. Q. Lin, C. Song, D. Gao, J.-W. Liu,
Z. Gao, D. Mao, and M. Z. Shou, “VideoLLM-online: Online video large
language model for streaming video,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June
2024, pp. 18 407–18 418.
[27] J. Liu, Z. Yu, S. Lan, S. Wang, R. Fang, J. Kautz, H. Li,
and J. M. Alvarez, “StreamChat: Chatting with streaming video,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.08646, 2025. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2412.08646
[28] H. Wang, B. Feng, Z. Lai, M. Xu, S. Li, W. Ge, A. Dehghan,
M.
Cao,
and
P.
Huang,
“StreamBridge:
Turning
your
offline
video large language model into a proactive streaming assistant,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05467, 2025. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2505.05467
[29] J. Chen, Z. Zeng, Y. Lin, W. Li, Z. Ma, and M. Z. Shou, “LiveCC:
Learning video llm with streaming speech transcription at scale,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2025, pp. 29 083–29 095.
[30] J. Lin, Z. Fang, C. Chen, Z. Wan, F. Luo, P. Li, Y. Liu, and M. Sun,
“StreamingBench: Assessing the gap for MLLMs to achieve streaming
video understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.03628, 2024. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.03628
[31] J. Lin, J. Tong, H. Wu, J. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Jin, and X. Shen,
“Speak While Watching: Unleashing true real-time video understanding
capability of multimodal large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.06843, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.
06843
[32] Y. Leviathan, M. Kalman, and Y. Matias, “Fast inference from transform-
ers via speculative decoding,” in Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2023, pp. 19 274–19 286.
[33] D. Q. Mayne, J. B. Rawlings, C. V. Rao, and P. O. M. Scokaert, “Con-
strained model predictive control: Stability and optimality,” Automatica,
vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 789–814, 2000.
