Title: Conformal Constraint Tightening for Chance-Constrained Motion Planning with Unknown Dynamics

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.22409v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Jul 2026 00:53:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Conformal Constraint Tightening for Chance-Constrained Motion Planning with Unknown Dynamics 

Shubham Natraj 1, Bruno Sinopoli 2 and Yiannis Kantaros 1

Abstract — Motion planning algorithms compute control se-quences that drive autonomous robots to goal regions while avoiding unsafe states. Existing methods, from sampling-based planning to deep reinforcement learning, typically provide task-completion guarantees only with respect to a nominal model or simulator, which may be invalidated when the true dynamics are unknown or difficult to model accurately. This letter addresses this limitation for systems with unknown dynamics and an available approximate nominal model, contributing a planner-agnostic constraint-tightening procedure that equips existing planners with a probabilistic task-completion guarantee on the true system. We leverage conformal prediction to provide a probabilistic bound on the nominal-to-true trajectory deviation over a distribution of planning problems. We tighten the planning constraints using that bound, and show that solving the tightened problem under the nominal model is a sufficient condition for solving the original problem on the true system with a prescribed probability. We validate the theoretical guarantees empirically and demonstrate substantially improved task completion relative to nominal-model planning. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Motion planning requires computing a sequence of con-trol inputs that drives a robot from an initial state to a desired goal region while avoiding unsafe states. Numerous approaches have been proposed, including sampling-based planners [1]–[6], model predictive control (MPC) methods [7]–[9], and deep-learning methods [10]–[14]. However, they typically assume access to an accurate model or simulator of the system. Consequently, their safety and task-completion guarantees may be invalidated by model mismatch. Here, we consider motion-planning problems in which the robot’s true dynamics are unknown, while an approximate nominal model 

is available. Our goal is to compute a control sequence whose execution on the true system reaches the goal region while avoiding unsafe states, with a prescribed probability over planning problems drawn from an unknown distribution. This problem is challenging since unmodeled effects, parameter uncertainty, and approximation errors in learned system dynamics can cause nominally safe trajectories to fail on the true system. In this paper, we propose a planner-agnostic framework for motion planning under model mismatch. First, we lever-age conformal prediction (CP) to quantify the discrepancy                  

> *This work was funded by NSF awards CNS-2231257 and CCF-2403758.
> 1Shubham Natraj and Yiannis Kantaros are with the Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Dr, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA,

{n.shubham, ioannisk }@wustl.edu  

> 2Bruno Sinopoli is with the School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, 650 E. Tyler Mall, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA,

bruno.sinopoli@asu.edu 

between nominal and true trajectories. Using a calibration dataset of nominal trajectories and their corresponding true trajectories obtained by executing the associated control sequences, CP provides a probabilistic bound on the worst-case nominal-to-true trajectory deviation over the planning horizon. This bound defines conformal balls around the states of any planned nominal trajectory that contain the corresponding true trajectory with a user-specified marginal probability. We then use the radius of these balls to shrink the free state space and goal region, yielding a planning problem with tightened constraints. We show that a control sequence computed for this tightened problem using the nominal model satisfies the original planning problem on the unknown true system with a prescribed probability. Thus, chance-constrained planning under unknown dynamics is reduced to deterministic planning under the nominal model which can be solved by any planning and control method. We empirically evaluate our framework using a sampling-based planner, demonstrating improved task-completion rates rel-ative to uncertainty-agnostic baselines. We also empirically characterize the trade-off between conservativeness and task completion as the prescribed probability increases. 

Related Works: Several motion-planning and control methods address uncertainty in system models. We organize the most relevant work into the following categories. 

Kinodynamic Planning: Sampling-based planners for un-certain systems have been proposed in [15]–[18]. These methods generally assume a known stochastic system model together with structural assumptions on the uncertainty. For example, CC-RRT [15] plans for a known discrete-time linear system subject to Gaussian process noise and uncertain obstacles by enforcing a prescribed probability of feasibility at each time step. DR-RRT and WDR-X [16], [17] relax distributional assumptions through ambiguity sets, but still propagate uncertainty using a known stochastic dynamics model or model class. Robust-RRT [18] considers nonlin-ear systems subject to parametric uncertainty with known bounds, which enable reachability analysis during planning. If the modeling assumptions in these works are violated, the associated guarantees need not hold. In contrast, we assume access only to a nominal model and consider unknown true dynamics without requiring a parametric uncertainty model or a known analytical relationship between the nominal and true dynamics. We assume only that the nominal and true systems share the same state and control spaces. 

Tracking Control: Related work also considers tracking control under stochastic dynamics and model uncertainty [19]–[25]. As in the kinodynamic-planning literature, many arXiv:2607.22409v1 [cs.RO] 24 Jul 2026 of these approaches assume known system models and impose structural assumptions on the disturbance process or model uncertainty. For example, [24] considers stochastic known linear systems whose noise mean belongs to an ambiguity set without considering safety constraints. The method in [25] combines geometric planning in a restricted free space obtained by inflating obstacles with user-chosen funnel bounds with a funnel-based feedback controller that guarantees tracking for a structured class of fully actuated systems. In contrast, our framework uses calibration data to determine the tightening of obstacle and goal sets required to provide a user-specified probabilistic task-completion guar-antee. More broadly, these methods address tracking-control problems that typically assume that a reference trajectory is given and seek to bound the deviation of the executed trajectory from that reference. Thus, the guarantees provided by these approaches are fundamentally different from the task-completion guarantee considered in this work. 

Conformal Prediction: CP has recently been applied to autonomy problems involving planning and control [26]– [29]. These works address problem settings and provide guar-antees that differ from those considered here. For example, [26] uses CP for stochastic optimal control and trajectory tracking in known linear systems subject to disturbances drawn from an unknown distribution. Similarly, [27], [28] use weighted CP to quantify uncertainty in learned dynamics models within learning-based MPC for trajectory-tracking tasks. In contrast, we formulate CP directly at the level of reach-avoid motion-planning problems for systems with unknown true dynamics and an available nominal model. The work closest to ours is [29], which also uses CP to provide probabilistic guarantees for planning and control under model uncertainty. Our framework, however, applies CP over a distribution of planning problems that may vary in obstacle configurations, initial states, goal regions, and horizons, yielding a task-completion guarantee for an unseen problem drawn from this distribution. This is particularly relevant in robotic applications when a planner is repeatedly invoked across new environments and missions. In contrast, [29] applies CP to local model-prediction errors at state-control pairs for a given planning task and propagates the resulting uncertainty through an SLS-based MPC controller. Consequently, its guarantee concerns the closed-loop execu-tion of that task and is not formulated over a distribution of planning problems whose environments and mission speci-fications may vary. Our framework is also planner-agnostic: the resulting tightened problem can be solved by any planner capable of enforcing the tightened constraints, whereas the guarantee in [29] is tied to its SLS-based MPC construction. 

Learning-based Approaches: Finally, learning-based tech-niques have also addressed planning and control problems under unknown dynamics or model mismatch. Examples include joint model and policy learning [13], [30], ac-tive model learning for uncertainty-aware MPC [31], resid-ual reinforcement learning [32], and sim-to-real transfer through dynamics randomization [33]. These methods ad-dress the broad challenge of acting under imperfect or un-known models, but they typically target empirical robustness and improved transfer performance without providing task-completion guarantees for the underlying true system. 

Contributions: The main contributions of this paper are: (1) We develop a CP-based uncertainty-quantification frame-work for systems with unknown true dynamics that uses only an approximate nominal model and calibration data collected from the true system to provide a probabilistic bound on trajectory-level nominal-to-true deviation over a distribution of planning problems. (2) We use this bound to define a planning problem with tightened constraints and prove that every control sequence solving it for the nominal model also solves the original problem on the true system with a prescribed probability. (3) We empirically validate these guarantees and demonstrate substantially improved task-completion rates compared with nominal-model planning. II. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

Consider a robot with discrete-time dynamics 

xt+1 = f (xt, ut), (1) where xt ∈ X ⊂ Rn denotes the robot state at time t, X

is the state space, and ut ∈ U is the control input. The true system dynamics f are assumed to be unknown. Instead, we have access to a deterministic nominal model 

ˆxt+1 = ˆf (ˆ xt, ut), (2) where ˆxt ∈ X denotes the nominal state. The nominal model is subject to the same state and input constraints as (1). While we focus here on deterministic true dynamics (1), extensions to stochastic dynamics are discussed in Remark 3.3. The objective is to compute a sequence of control in-puts ut driving the robot from an initial state xinit to a goal region Xgoal ⊆ X within a finite horizon H, while avoiding unsafe states collected in Xobs ⊂ X . We denote the corresponding safe state space by Xfree := X \ X obs .Such planning problems are represented by tuples M =(X , Xfree , xinit , Xgoal , H ). We assume that planning prob-lems are drawn independently from an unknown distribution 

DM, from which i.i.d. samples can be obtained. The problem addressed in this paper is stated as follows: 

Problem 1 (Chance-Constrained Safe Planning): Given a failure level α ∈ (0 , 1) , a nominal model ˆf in (2), and a planning problem M ∼ D M, compute a control sequence 

u0: T −1 := ( u0, u1, . . . , uT −1) with T ≤ H such that the trajectory followed by the true system in (1) satisfies the assigned task with probability at least 1 − α, i.e., 

P



∧Tt=0 (xt ∈ X free ) ∧ (xT ∈ X goal )



≥ 1 − α. (3) We emphasize that the probabilistic guarantee in (3) is not a per-task guarantee. Instead, the probability is taken marginally with respect to a planning problem M ∼ D M.III. P ROBABILISTICALLY SAFE PLANNING 

This section presents our solution to Problem 1. First, we use Conformal Prediction (CP) to quantify the discrepancy between nominal trajectories generated by (2) and true trajec-tories generated by (1); see Sections III-A-III-B. Next, given a new planning problem M ∼ D M, we use the resulting threshold to construct a tightened planning problem Mα and show that any control sequence u0: T −1 that solves Mα for the nominal model also solves Problem 1; see Section III-C. 

A. Background on Conformal Prediction 

CP provides distribution-free, finite-sample valid uncer-tainty quantification for the predictions of any fixed model [34], [35]. Formally, consider a predictive model σ : X → Y

that maps an input X ∈ X to a prediction σ(X) ∈ Y of a ground truth Y ∈ Y. CP does not make any assumptions on the underlying model or data distribution. Instead, it relies on a user-defined nonconformity score (NCS) function 

s : X×Y → R that quantifies the error or mismatch between the prediction σ(X) and the true outcome Y .Let Scal = {(Xi, Y i)}Ncal  

> i=1

be a calibration dataset con-sisting of Ncal i.i.d. samples drawn from a distribution D.We compute the calibration scores Ri = s(Xi, Y i) for all 

i ∈ {1, . . . , N cal }. Given an unseen test point X ∼ D

with an unknown ground truth Y , its corresponding unknown score is Rtest = s(X, Y ). Given a target failure probability 

α ∈ (0 , 1) , CP computes a threshold ˆqα for which the following marginal coverage guarantee holds: 

P Rtest ≤ ˆqα

 ≥ 1 − α, (4) where ˆqα is the (1 − α)-th empirical quantile of the set 

{R1, . . . , R Ncal , ∞} . Note that the probability in (4) is marginal, holding over the combined randomness of the calibration data and the new test sample drawn from D; all probabilities considered hereon are of this form. 

B. Quantifying Trajectory-level Model Mismatch with CP 

Our approach leverages CP to quantify the uncertainty of the nominal model ˆf in (2), i.e., the discrepancy between nominal trajectories generated by (2) and the corresponding true trajectories generated by (1). Applying CP in this setting requires two components: (i) a calibration dataset comprising planning problems and true trajectories collected from the unknown system, and (ii) an NCS that measures the prediction error of the nominal model on each planning problem. Using these components, CP computes a threshold 

ˆqα that bounds the nominal-to-true trajectory deviation with user-specified probability. 

Calibration Dataset: Consider a planning problem M ∼ DM. Let U(M) denote the set of all finite control se-quences u0: T −1 := ( u0, . . . , uT −1), with T ≤ H, whose nominal trajectories generated by (2) solve M. That is, each u0: T −1 ∈ U (M) generates nominal states ˆx0: T := (ˆ x0, . . . , ˆxT ), where ˆx0 = xinit , satisfying ˆxt ∈ Xfree 

for all t ∈ { 0, . . . , T } and ˆxT ∈ X goal . During calibration, we assume physical access to the true system (1), allowing nominally feasible control sequences to be executed and their resulting true trajectories x0: T := ( x0, . . . , xT ) to be collected, with x0 = xinit . The calibration dataset is Scal =

{(Mi, Yi)}Ncal  

> i=1

, where Mi are drawn i.i.d. from DM and 

Yi denotes the collection of true trajectories associated with selected nominally feasible control sequences from U(Mi).In practice, since executing every control sequence in U(Mi)

is generally intractable, Yi is constructed using a finite subset of nominally feasible control sequences; see Rem. 3.2. 

Nonconformity Score (NCS): For a planning problem 

M, we assign to the nominal model ˆf the following score, defined as the worst-case nominal-to-true trajectory deviation over all nominally feasible control sequences: 

R(M) := sup  

> u0: T−1∈U (M)

max   

> t∈{ 0,...,T }

∥xt − ˆxt∥2. (5) 

Calibration Step: For each calibration planning prob-lem Mi, we compute the corresponding score Ri := 

R(Mi). Given the calibration scores {Ri}Ncal  

> i=1

and a target failure probability α ∈ (0 , 1) , we compute the confor-mal threshold ˆqα as the (1 − α)-th empirical quantile of 

{R1, . . . , R Ncal , ∞} .

Nominal-to-True Model Error Bound: Given the test-time planning problem M ∼ D M, whose true trajectories generated by (1) are unavailable, the corresponding score 

R(M) in (5) is unknown. Applying CP as in (4) yields 

P sup  

> u0: T−1∈U (M)

max   

> t∈{ 0,...,T }

∥xt − ˆxt∥2 ≤ ˆqα

!

≥ 1 − α. (6) Geometrically, (6) means that, with probability at least 1−α,for every nominally feasible control sequence u0: T −1, the corresponding true states lie inside the sequence of radius-

ˆqα balls centered at the nominal states. This motivates the following sufficient condition for satisfying the chance constraint in Problem 1. 

Proposition 3.1 (Planning Guarantee): Let M ∼ D M be the planning problem in (6), and let u0: T −1 ∈ U (M) be 

any nominally feasible control sequence yielding a nominal trajectory ˆx0: T . Let B(z, r ) denote the closed Euclidean ball of radius r centered at z. If the sequence of radius-ˆqα balls centered at the nominal states is contained in the free space and its terminal ball is contained in the goal region, i.e., 

B(ˆ xt, ˆqα) ⊆ X free , ∀t ∈ { 0, . . . , T }, B(ˆ xT , ˆqα) ⊆ X goal ,

(7) then u0: T −1 solves Problem 1. 

Proof: By (6), with probability at least 1 − α, we have that: ∥xt − ˆxt∥2 ≤ ˆqα, ∀t ∈ {0, . . . , T }, for any nominally feasible control sequence u0: T −1 ∈ U (M).Equivalently, xt ∈ B (ˆ xt, ˆqα) for all t ∈ { 0, . . . , T } with probability at least 1 − α. If (7) holds, then these balls are contained in Xfree for all t ∈ { 0, . . . , T }, and the terminal ball is contained in Xgoal . Thus, the true trajectory remains in Xfree at every time and ends in Xgoal with probability at least 1 − α, i.e., (3) holds. 

Remark 3.2 (Practical Approximation of the NCS): 

Computing the NCS in (5) exactly requires optimizing over all nominally feasible control sequences in U(M), which is generally intractable. In line with related work [36], [37], we approximate it using a finite set of control sequences. Workspace         

> Eroded workspace
> Workspace 
> Eroded workspace
> Obstacle
> Inflated obstacle
> Goal goal
> Contracted goal ̂qα
> goal
> CP balls (̂ xt,̂ qα)
> Nominal states  ̂ xt
> True states xt
> Start

Fig. 1: Illustration of the proposed CP-based planning frame-work. The conformal threshold ˆqα induces a planning prob-lem with tightened constraints such that any control sequence solving it inherits the reach-avoid guarantee of Prop. 3.4. 

Remark 3.3 (Extension to Stochastic Dynamics): The above CP analysis can also be applied to stochastic true system dynamics of the form xt+1 = f (xt, ut, wt),where the disturbance wt takes values in a bounded set 

W. In this case, the score in (5) can be replaced by a worst-case score over both nominally feasible control sequences and admissible disturbance realizations, i.e., 

Rstoch (M) := sup w0: T −1∈W T R(M), where WT denotes the set of length-T disturbance sequences for the same horizon as u0: T −1 and R(M) is defined in (5). Applying CP using Rstoch yields the same form of marginal guarantee as (6). This extension can be conservative, especially when 

W is large. As discussed in Rem. 3.2 the NCS can be approximated by considering a finite set of feasible control sequences evaluated on the true stochastic system. We include a stochastic case study in Section IV; reducing the conservativeness of this construction is left for future work. 

C. Probabilistically Safe Planning 

Given the planning problem M and the conformal thresh-old ˆqα, we define a planning problem with tightened con-straints, Mα := ( X , X ˆqα

> free

, xinit , X ˆqα

> goal

, H ), where 

X ˆqα 

> free

:= {x ∈ X : B(x, ˆqα) ⊆ X free },

X ˆqα 

> goal

:= {x ∈ X : B(x, ˆqα) ⊆ X goal }. (8) Intuitively, X ˆqα 

> free

and X ˆqα 

> goal

are obtained by shrinking the free and goal sets by ˆqα. In the planar navigation example of Fig. 1, this is equivalent to inflating the obstacles, eroding the workspace boundary, and contracting the goal region. Solving Mα for the nominal model (2) thus requires the nominal state to eventually reach X ˆqα 

> goal

while remaining in X ˆqα

> free

; this can be addressed by any suitable planner, including sampling-based motion planners such as RRT [1], [38] and SST [2]. Next, we show that solving Mα yields a solution to Problem 1. 

Proposition 3.4 (Planner Guarantee): Every control se-quence that solves the tightened problem Mα for the nom-inal model (2) also solves the original problem M for the true system (1) with probability at least 1 − α.

Proof: Let u0: T −1 be a control sequence returned by a planner that solves Mα for the nominal model, and let ˆx0: T

be the corresponding nominal trajectory. By construction of 

Mα, we have ˆxt ∈ X ˆqα 

> free

for all t ∈ { 0, . . . , T } and ˆxT ∈X ˆqα

> goal

. By (8), this gives B(ˆ xt, ˆqα) ⊆ X free for all t and 

B(ˆ xT , ˆqα) ⊆ X goal ; in particular ˆxt ∈ X free and ˆxT ∈ X goal ,so u0: T −1 ∈ U (M). Hence, the returned nominal trajectory satisfies the ball-containment conditions in (7), and the result follows from Prop. 3.1. IV. E XPERIMENTAL VALIDATION 

This section evaluates the proposed CP-based planning framework introduced in Section III. Section IV-A describes the experimental setup. Our evaluation considers both deter-ministic and stochastic true-system dynamics. Section IV-B validates the guarantee in Proposition 3.4, and characterizes the trade-off between conservativeness and task completion as the prescribed probability increases. 

A. Experimental Setup 

System Dynamics: We evaluate our approach on two scenarios representing common forms of model mismatch in practice: known analytical models with incorrect parameters, and learned models for systems whose dynamics are difficult to model analytically [39]. (i) First, we consider a deterministic Dubins vehicle. The nominal state is ˆxt = [ˆ xt, ˆyt, ˆθt]⊤ ∈ R3 while the true state is xt = [ xt, y t, θ t]⊤ ∈ R3. The control input ut ∈

R denotes turn rate. The nominal dynamics are ˆxt+1 =ˆxt + ∆ t[cos( ˆθt), sin( ˆθt), u t]⊤, whereas the true dynamics are xt+1 = xt + ∆ t[(1 − βv ) cos( θt), (1 − βv ) sin( θt), u t]⊤,where ∆t is a discretization period. Compared to the nominal model, the true system experiences a translational slowdown, as would arise from surface or drivetrain resistance unac-counted for in the nominal model. The parameter βv ∈{0.05 , 0.10 , 0.15 , 0.20 } controls the magnitude of the model mismatch, yielding four distinct true system models that let us study how the planning behavior varies with mismatch. (ii) Our second case study considers a planar quadrotor, a higher-dimensional underactuated system, with stochastic dynamics. The true state is xt = [ xt, y t, θ t, v x,t , v y,t , ω t]⊤ ∈

R6, where (xt, y t) denotes the position, θt the pitch angle, 

(vx,t , v y,t ) the translational velocities, and ωt the angular velocity. The control input is ut = [ δT t, τ t]⊤ ∈ R2, where 

δT t denotes the thrust deviation from hover and τt the body torque. The true dynamics are: 

xt+1 = xt + ∆ t v x,t , yt+1 = yt + ∆ t v y,t ,θt+1 = θt + ∆ t ω t,vx,t +1 = vx,t + ∆ t



− 1

m (mg + δT t) sin θt + wx,t 



,vy,t +1 = vy,t + ∆ t

 1

m (mg + δT t) cos θt − g + wy,t 



,ωt+1 = ωt + ∆ t

h τt

I + wω,t 

i

, (9) where m = 1 , g = 9 .8, and I = 0 .25 . The process distur-bance is wt = [ wx,t , w y,t , w ω,t ]⊤, where each component is sampled independently from N (0 , 1) and clipped to the interval [−3, 3] . The nominal model used by the planner is a learned one-step neural network predictor trained on trajectory data from the noiseless version of (9). Given the current nominal state ˆxt and control input ut, the network predicts the nominal state increment ∆ˆ xt = hϕ(ˆ xt, ut),where hϕ is the trained network with parameters ϕ, and the nominal state is propagated as ˆxt+1 = ˆ xt + ∆ˆ xt. Unlike (i), the mismatch in this case is unstructured and arises jointly from approximation errors in the learned dynamics model and stochastic execution noise. 

Distribution of Planning Problems: In both case studies, planning problems are sampled from the same distribution 

DM. Each planning problem specifies obstacle and goal regions in the robot’s 2D workspace. These workspace con-straints induce the corresponding sets Xfree and Xgoal in the full state space. Each problem specifies a 25 ×25 environment containing five randomly placed circular obstacles, whose radii are sampled independently from [1 , 3] . The initial state is sampled uniformly from the free space, and the goal region is a circle of radius 5 centered at a location sampled uniformly from the free space, subject to a minimum distance of 15 units from the initial position. 

CP Application: A separate calibration dataset containing 

Ncal = 100 planning problems is constructed for each true system. Consequently, four calibration datasets are generated for the Dubins car (one for each value of βv ) and one dataset for the quadrotor. For each calibration planning problem, the NCS is approximated as described in Rem. 3.2 and 3.3 using 10 nominally feasible control sequences generated by a kinodynamic RRT planner [1]. 

Planner Implementation: In all experiments, we solve 

Mα using kinodynamic RRT that is run for a fixed number of iterations N : we use N = 2 , 000 for the Dubins model and N = 75 , 000 for the planar quadrotor. 

Evaluation metrics: Given a target coverage level 1 − α,we evaluate the proposed framework on 100 independently sampled planning problems drawn from DM. We report three metrics. (1) Empirical coverage is computed over the plans returned by the planner. A returned plan is counted as covered if the executed true trajectory remains within distance ˆqα of the corresponding nominal trajectory at every time step. We then report the fraction of returned plans that satisfy this condition. According to the CP guarantee in (6), the empirical coverage is expected to be at least equal to 

1 − α. (2) Planner success rate is defined as the fraction of planning problems for which the kinodynamic RRT planner finds a solution to the tightened planning problem Mα

within a fixed iteration budget N . If no solution is found, no control sequence is produced, even though the original planning problem M may still be feasible. As the prescribed probability 1 − α increases, the radius ˆqα becomes larger, resulting in a smaller free space X ˆqα 

> free

and goal region X ˆqα

> goal

making Mα harder to solve. Thus, this metric aims to characterize the conservativeness of the proposed approach. (3) Task-completion rate is evaluated over the subset of planning problems for which the planner returns a solution. It is defined as the fraction of returned plans whose executed true trajectories remain collision-free and reach the goal 25                  

> 50
> 75
> 100
> Empirical
> Coverage (%)
> Dubins Planar Quadrotor
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Planner
> Success (%)
> 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
> Target Coverage (%)
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Task
> Completion (%)
> Dashed:
> nominal RRT
> 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
> Target Coverage (%)
> Dashed:
> nominal RRT
> Dubins
> βv= 0.05
> βv= 0.10
> βv= 0.15
> βv= 0.20
> Quadrotor
> Guaranteed coverage

Fig. 2: Empirical results for the Dubins vehicle (left column) and planar quadrotor (right column). Rows report empirical coverage, planner success rate, and task-completion rate. Solid curves correspond to RRT applied to the tightened problem Mα. In the Dubins column, colors indicate the model-mismatch level βv . The gray dashed diagonals denote the prescribed probability 1 − α. In the bottom row, dashed horizontal lines denote the nominal RRT baseline in the corresponding color. region, i.e., satisfy (3). Due to Proposition 3.4, the task completion rate is expected to be at least 1 − α.

Nominal Planning Baseline: To demonstrate the benefits of accounting for nominal-model imperfections, we compare the proposed framework against RRT applied directly to the nominal model. Specifically, the baseline uses the same nominal model and iteration budget as our approach, but plans over the original planning problem, M. To ensure a fair comparison and isolate the effect of conformal tightening, the baseline is evaluated on the same subset of planning problems for which our method returns a solution. 

B. Empirical Results 

To characterize the effect of the prescribed coverage level on planning performance, we evaluate the proposed framework for 1 − α ∈ { 0.30 , 0.40 , . . . , 0.90 }.

Dubins vehicle: The left column of Figure 2 summarizes the results for the Dubins vehicle case study. The top-left panel compares the empirical coverage against the prescribed level 1 − α. In all cases, the empirical coverage exceeds the target level, as expected due to (6). As the model mismatch increases (larger βv ), the gap between the empirical and prescribed coverage also increases. This behavior is expected because larger mismatch produces larger nominal-to-true tra-jectory deviations, resulting in larger calibration scores and, consequently, a larger conformal threshold ˆqα. As a result, the conformal balls become more conservative, leading to empirical coverage that exceeds the prescribed level. This conservativeness has a direct effect on planner suc-cess rate . Specifically, increasing either 1 − α or the model mismatch enlarges ˆqα, which shrinks the tightened free and goal sets. Thus, fewer nominal trajectories satisfy the conditions in Proposition 3.1, reducing the planner success rate. The middle-left panel shows this trade-off. However, the degradation remains moderate over the sampled problems. The bottom-left panel reports the task-completion rate . As predicted by Proposition 3.4, the observed task-completion rate consistently exceeds 1 − α. Moreover, the proposed framework consistently outperforms the nominal-planning baseline, with the performance gap increasing as both the model mismatch and 1 − α increase. Overall, these results highlight the main trade-off of the proposed approach: in-creasing the prescribed coverage level 1 − α yields more conservative planning, reducing planner success rate while substantially improving the reliability of the returned plans. 

Planar quadrotor: The right column of Fig. 2 summarizes the results for the stochastic quadrotor case. Similar trends are observed. The empirical coverage consistently exceeds the prescribed level 1−α, validating the CP guarantee despite the combination of learned-model error and stochastic exe-cution noise. As the prescribed coverage level increases, the planner success rate decreases because the larger conformal threshold ˆqα yields a more conservative tightening of the free and goal sets. Nevertheless, the success rate remains high across the tested range. At the same time, the task-completion rate increases with the prescribed coverage level and consistently outperforms the nominal-planning baseline. Specifically, the task-completion rate of our method rises from about 80% at 1 − α = 30% to 100% at 1 − α = 90% ,while the nominal RRT baseline achieves about 55% .V. C ONCLUSION 

This paper addressed motion planning for systems with unknown dynamics using an approximate nominal model. Using CP, we derived a probabilistic bound on the nominal-to-true trajectory deviation. We used this bound to construct tightened planning problems such that any control sequence solving them under the nominal model also solves the origi-nal planning problem on the true system with the prescribed probability. Comparative experiments on unseen planning problems validated the theoretical guarantees. Future work will focus on reducing conservativeness and developing adaptive-risk planning strategies when no plan can be com-puted with the desired probability. REFERENCES [1] S. M. LaValle and J. J. Kuffner Jr, “Randomized kinodynamic plan-ning,” The international journal of robotics research , vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 378–400, 2001. [2] Y. Li, Z. Littlefield, and K. E. Bekris, “Asymptotically optimal sampling-based kinodynamic planning,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 528–564, 2016. [3] X. Luo, Y. Kantaros, and M. M. Zavlanos, “An abstraction-free method for multirobot temporal logic optimal control synthesis,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1487–1507, 2021. [4] N. Perrault, Q. H. Ho, and M. Lahijanian, “Kino-pax: Highly parallel kinodynamic sampling-based planner,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2430–2437, 2025. [5] T. Duong, C. W. Ramsey, Z. Kingston, W. Thomason, and L. E. Kavraki, “Ultrafast sampling-based kinodynamic planning via differ-ential flatness,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.16059 , 2026. [6] N. Wang and R. G. Sanfelice, “A rapidly-exploring random trees motion planning algorithm for hybrid dynamical systems,” in 2022 IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2022, pp. 2626–2631. [7] X. Fang and W.-H. Chen, “Model predictive control with preview: Recursive feasibility and stability,” IEEE Control Systems Letters ,vol. 6, pp. 2647–2652, 2022. [8] C. E. Luis, M. Vukosavljev, and A. P. Schoellig, “Online trajectory generation with distributed model predictive control for multi-robot motion planning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 604–611, 2020. [9] Y. Chen, U. Rosolia, W. Ubellacker, N. Csomay-Shanklin, and A. D. Ames, “Interactive multi-modal motion planning with branch model predictive control,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 5365–5372, 2022. [10] V. Tsounis, M. Alge, J. Lee, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Deepgait: Planning and control of quadrupedal gaits using deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3699–3706, 2020. [11] G. Malczyk, M. Kulkarni, and K. Alexis, “Semantically-driven deep reinforcement learning for inspection path planning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [12] S. Safaoui, A. P. Vinod, A. Chakrabarty, R. Quirynen, N. Yoshikawa, and S. Di Cairano, “Safe multiagent motion planning under uncertainty for drones using filtered reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 40, pp. 2529–2542, 2024. [13] Y. Lu, X. Zhang, X. Xu, and W. Yao, “Learning-based near-optimal motion planning for intelligent vehicles with uncertain dynamics,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1532–1539, 2023. [14] P. Rousseas, C. P. Bechlioulis, and K. J. Kyriakopoulos, “Optimal robot motion planning in constrained workspaces using reinforcement learning,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 6917–6922. [15] B. Luders, M. Kothari, and J. How, “Chance constrained rrt for prob-abilistic robustness to environmental uncertainty,” in AIAA guidance, navigation, and control conference , 2010, p. 8160. [16] T. Summers, “Distributionally robust sampling-based motion planning under uncertainty,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 6518–6523. [17] I. Gracia, Q. H. Ho, L. Laurenti, and M. Lahijanian, “Provably safe motion planning under unknown disturbances,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.26625 , 2026. [18] A. Wu, T. Lew, K. Solovey, E. Schmerling, and M. Pavone, “Robust-rrt: Probabilistically-complete motion planning for uncertain nonlinear systems,” in The International Symposium of Robotics Research .Springer, 2022, pp. 538–554. [19] F. Micheli and J. Lygeros, “Scenario-based stochastic mpc for systems with uncertain dynamics,” in 2022 European Control Conference (ECC) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 833–838. [20] F. Micheli, T. Summers, and J. Lygeros, “Data-driven distributionally robust mpc for systems with uncertain dynamics,” in IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2022, pp. 4788–4793. [21] J. Michaux, P. Holmes, B. Zhang, C. Chen, B. Wang, S. Sahgal, T. Zhang, S. Dey, S. Kousik, and R. Vasudevan, “Can’t touch this: Real-time, safe motion planning and control for manipulators under uncertainty,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2025. [22] R. Das, A. Basu, C. Verginis, and P. Jagtap, “Spatiotemporal tubes for differential drive robots with model uncertainty,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.05495 , 2025. [23] D. Q. Mayne, E. C. Kerrigan, E. Van Wyk, and P. Falugi, “Tube-based robust nonlinear model predictive control,” International journal of robust and nonlinear control , vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 1341–1353, 2011. [24] G. Pan and T. Faulwasser, “Distributionally robust uncertainty quan-tification via data-driven stochastic optimal control,” IEEE Control Systems Letters , vol. 7, pp. 3036–3041, 2023. [25] C. K. Verginis, D. V. Dimarogonas, and L. E. Kavraki, “Kdf: Kin-odynamic motion planning via geometric sampling-based algorithms and funnel control,” IEEE Transactions on robotics , vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 978–997, 2022. [26] E. E. Vlahakis, L. Lindemann, P. Sopasakis, and D. V. Dimarogonas, “Conformal prediction for distribution-free optimal control of linear stochastic systems,” IEEE Control Systems Letters , vol. 8, pp. 2835– 2840, 2024. [27] K. Y. Chee, M. A. Hsieh, and G. J. Pappas, “Uncertainty quantification for learning-based mpc using weighted conformal prediction,” in 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2023, pp. 342–349. [28] K. Y. Chee, T. C. Silva, M. A. Hsieh, and G. J. Pappas, “Uncertainty quantification and robustification of model-based controllers using conformal prediction,” in 6th Annual Learning for Dynamics &Control Conference . PMLR, 2024, pp. 528–540. [29] A. Srinivasan, A. Leeman, and G. Chou, “Safety beyond the training data: Robust out-of-distribution mpc via conformalized system level synthesis,” in Learning for Dynamics and Control , 2026. [30] Z. Zhang, G. Puthumanaillam, M. Vora, and M. Ornik, “Motion planning and control with unknown nonlinear dynamics through predicted reachability,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 342–349. [31] A. Saviolo, J. Frey, A. Rathod, M. Diehl, and G. Loianno, “Active learning of discrete-time dynamics for uncertainty-aware model pre-dictive control,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 40, pp. 1273– 1291, 2023. [32] T. Johannink, S. Bahl, A. Nair, J. Luo, A. Kumar, M. Loskyll, J. A. Ojea, E. Solowjow, and S. Levine, “Residual reinforcement learning for robot control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.03201 , 2018. [33] X. B. Peng, M. Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control with dynamics randomization,” in 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) .IEEE, 2018, pp. 3803–3810. [34] A. N. Angelopoulos and S. Bates, “Conformal prediction: A gentle introduction,” Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 494–591, 2023. [35] G. Shafer and V. Vovk, “A tutorial on conformal prediction.” Journal of machine learning research , vol. 9, no. 3, 2008. [36] D. S. Sundarsingh, Y. Li, T. Tang, G. J. Pappas, N. Atanasov, and Y. Kantaros, “Safe planning in unknown environments using confor-malized semantic maps,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2026. [37] Z. Mei, A. Dixit, M. Booker, E. Zhou, M. Storey-Matsutani, A. Z. Ren, O. Shorinwa, and A. Majumdar, “Perceive with confidence: Statistical safety assurances for navigation with learning-based perception,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 938– 967, 2026. [38] S. LaValle, “Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path planning,” Research Report 9811 , 1998. [39] A. Altawaitan and N. Atanasov, “Adapting neural robot dynamics on the fly for predictive control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.04039 , 2026.