Title: MindClaw: Closed-Loop Embodied Mental-State Reasoning for Precision Intervention

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.01063

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 01:16:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
> 1

# MindClaw: Closed-Loop Embodied Mental-State Reasoning for Precision Intervention 

Ruoxuan Zhang, Qiaoqiao Wan, Zhengguang Wang, Chenghao Yu, Hongxia Xie , Jianlong Fu, Wen-Huang Cheng 

Abstract —Theory of Mind (ToM) enables an agent to reason about another actor’s beliefs, goals, and intentions, which is essential for human-centered embodied assistance. Existing ToM benchmarks have advanced text and multimodal mental-state recognition, but they mostly evaluate offline question answering or final action prediction. They do not fully test whether an embodied agent can stay connected to a changing environment, update actor-specific beliefs, decide when reasoning is needed, and intervene only when help is useful. Building on MindPower, we extend robot-centric ToM reasoning to a real-time closed-loop setting and introduce MindClaw, a framework for embodied mental-state reasoning with precision intervention. MindClaw connects multi-source inputs, belief memory, an embodied cog-nitive trigger skill, mental reasoning, and action generation, allowing the agent to output helpful actions at the right time while remaining silent when intervention is unnecessary. Experiments show that direct VLM baselines struggle with task awareness and intervention calibration, while MindClaw achieves the best overall performance, demonstrating the importance of trigger-skill optimization for closed-loop embodied ToM assistance. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Theory of Mind (ToM) is the ability to infer other agents’ mental states, including what they believe, desire, and intend. It is a core mechanism behind social reasoning and collab-orative behavior [1], [2], [3]. In embodied intelligence, ToM is especially important because an assistant should not only perceive the physical world, but also understand how a human may subjectively interpret that world. The Belief–Desire– Intention (BDI) framework provides a classical computational view of this process: an agent forms beliefs from observa-tions, derives desires from goals, and commits to intentions that guide action [4]. This perspective naturally raises a key question for embodied agents: can they reason about a human’s mental state and use that reasoning to decide when and how to help? Recent multimodal ToM benchmarks have made important progress toward this goal. Text-based benchmarks evaluate social reasoning in narratives, while multimodal benchmarks introduce images or videos to test belief, goal, and intention understanding [5], [6], [7]. However, most existing bench-marks still treat ToM as an offline recognition or question-answering problem. The model is usually asked to infer a character’s belief or goal after observing a fixed clip. Such a formulation is useful for measuring mental-state recognition, 

> Corresponding author: Hongxia Xie. Ruoxuan Zhang, Qiaoqiao Wan, Zhengguang Wang, Chenghao Yu, and Hongxia Xie are with Jilin University. Jianlong Fu is with Microsoft Asia. Wen-Huang Cheng is with National Taiwan University.

but it does not require an embodied assistant to maintain state over time, decide whether reasoning should be activated, or act back into an environment. As a result, models can appear competent at answering ToM questions while still failing to behave as useful interactive helpers. MindPower [8] takes an important step beyond role-centric ToM recognition by introducing a robot-centric reasoning hierarchy that connects perception, belief, desire, intention, decision, and action. It explicitly evaluates whether VLM-based embodied agents can generate decisions and action plans under false-belief correction and implicit-goal completion tasks. This is a major advance over benchmarks that only ask for human mental-state labels. Nevertheless, MindPower still represents assistance mainly as a final decision/action output after a complete reasoning hierarchy. The agent observes the scenario, reasons through the hierarchy, and then produces an action plan. It does not fully model real-time interaction where the assistant remains connected to a changing simulator, updates memory at each step, decides whether to trigger mental reasoning, and acts only when the current state warrants intervention. This distinction matters because real embodied assistance is not equivalent to always producing an action. In human-centered environments, unnecessary help can be disruptive, intrusive, or even harmful [9]. A capable assistant must there-fore follow a precision-intervention principle: intervene only when intervention is needed, and otherwise remain silent. For example, if a human is already aligned with the environment and progressing normally, the correct robot action is no action. If the human acts under a stale belief about an object location, the robot may need to reason about that mismatch and generate a minimal helpful action. Thus, the central problem is not only what action should the robot output , but when should the system update memory, reason about another mind, generate help, or do nothing .We propose MindClaw as an extension of MindPower [8] 

from final-stage robot-centric action generation to closed-loop embodied mental-state assistance. MindClaw keeps the robot-centric motivation of MindPower, but changes the computa-tional problem from static hierarchy completion to online cog-nitive control. The system connects to multiple input sources, including static videos, VirtualHome [10], ThreeDWorld [11], and human-control events. At each step, it first obtains the observation, then uses a trigger module to decide the next internal cognitive operation. The trigger may update the belief table, invoke mental reasoning, call action generation, or emit 

noop . Only when reasoning indicates that help is warranted 

> arXiv:2606.01063v1 [cs.AI] 31 May 2026 2

does MindClaw output a robot action. The key idea is to formulate triggering as an embodied cog-nitive skill. Rather than mapping video directly to an action, MindClaw performs intermediate cognitive modeling over observation, actor-specific belief memory, recent operations, and valid scene candidates. This trigger skill decides whether the current state requires belief writing, mental reasoning, action generation, or no operation. We further collect skills from correct and incorrect trajectories, validate them across trajectories, group them by atomic operation, and use them as strong rules, preferred conditions, or negative conditions during inference. Strong rules can be matched deterministi-cally, while ambiguous cases are handled by a skill-augmented trigger model. Our contributions are threefold:  

> •

We extend robot-centric ToM reasoning from final-stage decision/action generation to a real-time closed-loop set-ting where the assistant remains connected to an environ-ment and can act back into it.  

> •

We introduce precision intervention as the central ob-jective for embodied mental-state assistance: the robot should generate helpful actions only when needed and output none otherwise.  

> •

We formulate the trigger as an embodied cognitive skill that performs intermediate operation selection over ob-servation, belief memory, recent operations, and scene candidates, enabling explicit control over when to update memory, reason, act, or remain silent. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Theory-of-Mind Benchmarks 

Recent language and multimodal Theory-of-Mind (ToM) benchmarks have made social and mental-state reasoning measurable in modern foundation models. Text-based bench-marks such as FANToM [12] and Hi-ToM [13] evaluate whether language models can reason about social situations, nested beliefs, and character-specific mental states in narrative contexts. Multimodal benchmarks such as MMToM-QA [6], MuMA-ToM [5], and BDIQA [7] further introduce images or videos and ask models to infer beliefs, desires, intentions, or hidden goals from visual evidence. These datasets are important because they move ToM evaluation beyond purely textual reasoning. However, they still mainly formulate ToM as offline recognition or question answering: the model observes a fixed story, image, or clip and predicts a label or answer. This does not test whether an embodied agent can remain connected to a changing environment, maintain actor-specific memory over time, decide when ToM reasoning should be activated, or choose whether intervention is needed. MindPower [8] moves closer to embodied assistance by introducing a robot-centric reasoning hierarchy from perception to action, but it still mainly evaluates final decision/action generation after observing a scenario. MindClaw follows this robot-centric direction while shifting the problem to real-time closed-loop precision intervention, where the agent must decide when to update memory, reason, act, or remain silent. Mind Power : Enabling Theory -of -Mind Reasoning             

> in VLM -based Embodied Agents
> Decision
> What should Ido
> Action
> How to perform
> Real World
> Desires
> Beliefs Intentions
> Mental World
> BDI
> Reasoning
> Level -2
> Level -3
> Perception
> Human/World State
> Level -1
> Embodied
> Agents

Fig. 1: MindPower Reasoning Hierarchy. The agent first receives multimodal input, then performs mental reasoning to form beliefs, desires, and intentions, and finally makes decisions and generates action plan based on this reasoning. 

B. Claw-Based Embodied Interaction Frameworks 

Claw-style agent frameworks study how large models can be connected to tools, applications, and executable environ-ments. OpenClaw [14] provides an agent runtime for tool invocation, interaction state, and external execution, and recent embodied extensions show that this architecture can support robotic interaction. RoboClaw [15] uses a VLM-driven agent controller for scalable long-horizon robotic tasks, while ABot-Claw [16] extends OpenClaw toward persistent, cooperative, and self-evolving robotic agents with a unified embodiment interface, multimodal memory, and critic-based feedback. These frameworks demonstrate that Claw-like systems can be used in embodied intelligence rather than only software automation. Nevertheless, their focus is mainly task execution, skill orchestration, robot capability scheduling, memory, and replanning. They do not explicitly model human mental states as part of the control problem, maintain actor-specific belief tables, or decide whether a human is acting under a false belief or hidden goal. MindClaw addresses this missing direction by combining Claw-style interaction and execution with ToM-driven precision intervention: its trigger is an embodied cog-nitive skill that decides when mental-state reasoning should affect robot action. III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. MindPower Benchmark 

MindPower [8] is a robot-centric theory-of-mind (ToM) benchmark designed to evaluate whether VLM-based em-bodied agents can link visual perception, mental-state rea-soning, decision making, and action generation. As shown in Table I, it contains 590 video-text examples, where the model takes a video as input and produces structured textual outputs. Unlike benchmarks that only evaluate mental-state inference, MindPower provides labels that include not only belief, desire, and intention reasoning, but also downstream decisions and executable actions. It defines two task types: 

False-Belief Correction , where the agent assists a person who holds an incorrect belief about the environment, and Implicit Goal Inference and Completion , where the agent infers an 3

TABLE I: Comparison of Theory-of-Mind (ToM) Benchmarks. “MCQ” denotes Multiple Choice Question. “Level-3 Ability” indicates whether each dataset involves False-Belief Correction , Implicit Goal Inference & Completion , and Decision Making and Action level .

Dataset Modality Output Agent Type Perspective Format Scale Level-3 Ability 

Hi-ToM [13] Text Belief - Role-Centric MCQ 1,800 stories ✗

BigToM [17] Text Belief, Role’s action - Role-Centric MCQ 5,000 text items ✗

FANToM [12] Text Belief - Role-Centric MCQ 256 stories ✗

MuMA-ToM [5] Video, Text Belief, Goal Virtual Human Role-Centric MCQ 225 examples ✗

MMToM-QA [6] Video, Text Belief, Goal Virtual Human Role-Centric MCQ 134 videos ✗

GridToM [18] Video, Text Belief Grid-world Agent Role-Centric MCQ 1,296 videos ✗

SoMi-ToM [19] Video, Image State, Goal, Behavior Minecraft Roles Role-Centric MCQ 35 videos / 363 images ✗

Ours Video, Text Perception, Belief, Desire, Intention, Decision, Action Virtual Human Robot-Centric Open-Ended 590 examples ✓Alice walks into the kitchen. Alice puts the apple on the table. Alice leaves the kitchen.                          

> Stage  1
> Alice walks around.
> Stage  3
> David walks into the kitchen. David picks up the apple.
> David puts the apple in the
> refrigerator and leaves the kitchen.
> Stage  2
> Level -2(Robot -Centric)
> Mental Reasoning
> Level -1
> Perception
> Alice walks into
> the kitchen …
> Level -2(Role -Centric)
> Mental Reasoning

Decision : I need to open the fridge 

and give the apple to her. 

Action : walk (fridge), open (fridge), 

pick (apple), walk (Alice)                                     

> Which of the following statements is
> most likely?
> A) Alice believed that David wants .. .
> B) Alice believed that David wants .. .
> C) Alice believed that David placed ...
> <Robot Belief> I believe Alic e.. .I believe
> Alice thinks the apple is still on the table. I
> believe …
> <Robot Desire> I want to assist Alice ... I
> want to resolve …
> <Robot Intention> I want to …
> MindPower
> Reasoning
> Hierarchy
> Existing ToM
> Benchmark
> (e.g. MuMA -ToM )
> Previous: Only infer Alice’s
> mental state
> Ours: Infer both robot’s and
> Alice’s mental state
> Level -3
> Decision Making and Action

Fig. 2: Robot-Centric MindPower Reasoning Hierarchy. Existing benchmarks, such as MuMA-ToM, include only Stage 1 and Stage 2 of the video, and focus solely on inferring the mental reasoning of the human (Alice) in the input video. Our dataset additionally includes Stage 3, where Alice returns to search for the item. Moreover, in Level-2 (Mental Reasoning) of MindPower, we infer the mental reasoning of both the embodied agent and the human, whereas existing ToM Benchmarks only infer the role’s mental state through multiple-choice questions. Detailed example is provided in Sec. B of the Supplementary Material. unstated goal from human behavior and completes the missing assistance. MindPower further introduces a reasoning hier-archy that organizes perception, mental reasoning, decision making, and action generation, as shown in Fig. 2 and Tab. I. Compared with prior ToM benchmarks, MindPower focuses on scenarios in which mental reasoning is necessary for selecting appropriate decisions and actions. 

B. Limitations of the Starting Setting 

Each MindPower example mainly requires the model to observe a complete scenario and then generate a reasoning hierarchy together with a final decision or action. This setting is useful for evaluating robot-centric ToM reasoning, but it remains a static video-to-text formulation. The agent is not required to stay connected to a live simulator, maintain belief states over time, or determine whether and when mental reasoning should be triggered during interaction. MindClaw preserves the robot-centric ToM objective of MindPower, but extends it to a real-time embodied interaction setting. Specifically, it introduces actor-specific belief memory, trigger-controlled cognitive operations, and precision intervention, enabling the agent to reason and act only when the evolving scene requires it. IV. M ETHOD 

A. Task Formulation 

We study closed-loop embodied mental-state reasoning for precision intervention in settings where an assistant can be connected to an executable environment in real time. The input is not limited to a pre-recorded video. MindClaw supports multiple input sources: static video, live simulator streams from VirtualHome [10] or ThreeDWorld [11], human instruc-tions, and keyboard-control events. In the static-video setting, the system replays an offline clip as a sequence of visual windows. In the simulator setting, it connects to an executable environment, receives online state or rendered observations, and can send back executable commands. In the human-input setting, user instructions or control events are converted into the same runtime interface. At each window or interaction step, the assistant must decide whether the current state requires internal cognitive updates and, ultimately, whether the robot should output a helpful action. This setting differs from static mental-state recognition because the goal is not only to infer what an actor believes. The goal is to control an online loop that turns observation and actor-specific mental-state memory into calibrated assistance. The simulator connection is therefore not only a data source. It is part of the task: the system must reason under changing state, decide whether intervention is necessary, 4

output an executable robot action when help is needed, and then observe the effect of that action. Let wt denote the input window at step t, and let st denote the maintained runtime state before processing the window. In MindClaw, st contains actor-specific belief memory, scene context, recent trigger outputs, and execution history. Process-ing wt produces a trace 

τt = ( ot, z (1)  

> t

, . . . , z (K) 

> t

, r t, a t, e t), (1) where ot is the structured observation extracted from wt,

z(1)  

> t

, . . . , z (K) 

> t

are internal cognitive operations selected by the trigger loop, rt is the mental-reasoning result when reasoning is invoked, at is the final robot action or none , and et is the execution result returned by the environment. This notation separates internal trigger decisions from the action output. The trigger decides what computation should happen next; the framework is designed so that the final output at is a helpful executable action when intervention is warranted. The trigger output is an internal cognitive operation: 

zt = verb(actor , object , location) . (2) The operation space is defined in Sec. IV-F. It decomposes embodied assistance into visual-state tracking, actor-belief modeling, belief revision, reasoning activation, and interven-tion calibration. This decomposition is important because end-to-end failure can arise from different cognitive stages. A model may correctly observe that an object moved but fail to update an actor belief. It may maintain memory correctly but fail to invoke mental reasoning. It may invoke reasoning but fail to produce a useful robot action. MindClaw follows a precision-intervention principle. If the actor is aligned with the observed world state and is pro-gressing normally, the final robot action should be none . If the maintained belief state and current observation indicate a useful opportunity to resolve a false belief, hidden goal, or task-blocking mismatch, MindClaw should output a minimal helpful action at. Therefore, noop is a first-class trigger outcome, and none is a valid final action. 

B. Architecture Overview 

MindClaw is organized into three parts, as shown in Fig. 3: a multi-source input interface, a Claw Layer, and a Reasoning Layer. The input interface receives observations from Virtu-alHome, ThreeDWorld, static videos, or human input such as keyboard control. The Claw Layer maintains the online state of the interaction and decides which internal cognitive operation should be executed next. The Reasoning Layer provides three model-based services: observation, mental rea-soning, and action generation. The two layers communicate in both directions. The Claw Layer sends the current window and state to the Reasoning Layer, and the Reasoning Layer returns structured outputs that update memory or produce robot actions. For each step, MindClaw executes the following loop: 1) receive input from a simulator, static video, or human-control interface; 2) normalize the input through the Adapter and pass it to the Engine; 3) call the Observation module to obtain a structured de-scription ot;4) use the Trigger to select the next internal operation zt

from ot, Memory, and candidate slots; 5) execute zt: update the belief table if zt is a belief opera-tion, call Mental Reasoning if zt = reasoning_run ,call Action Generation if zt = action_run , or stop the trigger loop if zt = noop ;6) output and execute a helpful robot action at when intervention is justified. This architecture separates internal cognitive control from external robot behavior. The trigger output zt controls the loop, while the robot action at is the final assistance output. This separation is important because the system should often update memory or reason without acting, and should output an action only when intervention is useful. 

C. Input Interface 

The input interface makes MindClaw usable across different embodied settings. It supports four sources shown in the architecture: VirtualHome, ThreeDWorld, static video, and hu-man input. VirtualHome and ThreeDWorld provide executable simulator environments. They can stream visual observations, expose symbolic scene information, and receive executable commands from the robot. Static video provides offline visual windows for replay and evaluation. Human input, including keyboard control or user instructions, provides interactive events that can change the task state or actor behavior. All input sources are converted into a common window rep-resentation. A window may contain rendered frames, simulator state, object and actor identifiers, user-control metadata, task context, and candidate actor/object/location sets. This common representation allows the rest of the framework to remain unchanged across offline video analysis, real-time simulator execution, and human-controlled interaction. In the simulator setting, the interface is closed loop: after MindClaw outputs an action at, the action is sent to the environment, and the next input window reflects the updated state. 

D. Claw Layer 

The Claw Layer is the control layer of MindClaw. It is responsible for maintaining the online state of the interaction and deciding when to call the Reasoning Layer. It contains four components: Engine, Adapter, Memory, and Trigger. 

Engine. The Engine manages the whole runtime loop. It receives normalized input windows, calls the Reasoning Layer when needed, applies trigger-selected state updates, and stores artifacts. It also enforces the step order of the system: obser-vation first, trigger decision second, and then the operation selected by the trigger. Thus, belief-table modification is not an independent pre-trigger step. It happens only when the trigger emits a belief create or update operation. In simulator mode, the Engine keeps the loop synchronized with the environment so that every executed action can affect the next state. 5Engine 

Adpter Memory Belief 

Table Recent 

> Operations

Trigger 

> VirtualHome
> ThreeDWorld
> Static Video
> Human
> Input
> Keyboard
> Control

Input 

Claw 

Layer Rules Skills 

Reasoning 

Layer Observation 

Mental 

Reasoning 

Action 

Generation 

Fig. 3: Architecture Overview. MindClaw has three layers: Input layer, Claw layer, and Reasonong layer. 

Adapter. The Adapter hides differences across input sources. It converts VirtualHome states, ThreeDWorld streams, static video frames, and human-control events into the same internal window format. It also maps simulator-specific object names, actor identifiers, and action commands into canonical names used by the Reasoning Layer. This allows the trigger and memory modules to operate on stable actor, object, and location slots rather than source-specific formats. 

Memory. Memory stores the information needed for closed-loop mental-state reasoning. It has two parts. The first is the recent operation history, which records previous trigger outputs, reasoning calls, action-generation calls, and execution results. The second is the belief table, which separates visually grounded facts from actor-specific beliefs: 

visual_facts [object ] → location, 

actor_beliefs [actor ][ object ] → location. (3) This representation is central to false-belief assistance. If an object is currently on a shelf but an actor still believes it is on a desk, the mismatch is visible in memory. The mismatch does not directly command the robot to act, but it provides the evidence used by the trigger and mental-reasoning modules. The belief table is updated through trigger operations, not by the Observation module directly. 

Trigger. The Trigger is implemented as an embodied cog-nitive skill that decides the next internal operation zt. It reads the current observation, recent operations, belief table, and candidate slots, then chooses whether the system should update the belief table, run mental reasoning, run action generation, or do nothing. We describe the Trigger in detail in Sec. IV-F, because it is the main decision point that determines whether the robot can produce timely and non-intrusive help. 

E. Reasoning Layer 

The Reasoning Layer contains the model-based components that interpret observations, infer mental states, and generate actions. It has three modules: Observation, Mental Reasoning, and Action Generation. 

Observation. The Observation module converts an input window into a structured description ot. It summarizes visible actors, object movements, candidate object locations, visibility events, and task-relevant scene context. Its role is descriptive rather than prescriptive: it does not decide whether the robot should help. This keeps perception separate from intervention and makes later failures easier to diagnose. 

Mental Reasoning. The Mental Reasoning module is called when the Trigger emits reasoning_run . Given the current observation and belief table, it judges whether the focus actor is likely acting under a false belief, hidden goal, or other mental-state mismatch. It also decides whether the mismatch blocks task progress and whether intervention is warranted. Its output is a reasoning record rt, not a robot command. 

Action Generation. The Action Generation module is called when the Trigger emits action_run . It converts the reasoning record into the final robot action at. If intervention is not justified, at = none . If help is needed, at is a minimal helpful action or action sequence, such as moving toward an object, opening a container, relocating an object, or 6

guiding the actor toward the correct place. In simulator mode, the generated action is compiled into executable environment commands and sent back through the Adapter. 

F. Trigger as a Cognitive Dispatcher 

The Trigger is the dispatcher between the Claw Layer and the Reasoning Layer. We formulate it as an embodied cognitive skill : a reusable intermediate policy that decides which cognitive operation should be executed before the robot produces an external action. This skill is embodied because its decision is grounded in the current observation, actor-specific belief memory, recent operations, and executable environment context. It is cognitive because its output is not a physical robot command, but an internal operation that controls memory writing, mental reasoning, action generation, or silence. Let 

xt = ( ot, B t−1, H t−1, C t) (4) denote the trigger context, where ot is the structured obser-vation, Bt−1 is the current belief table, Ht−1 is the recent operation history, and Ct contains the valid actor, object, and location candidates. The Trigger outputs 

zt = ( vt, i t, j t, ℓ t), (5) where vt is the operation verb, and it, jt, and ℓt are the actor, object, and location slots. The operation zt is not the robot’s external action. It is a control signal that decides which internal computation should happen next. We model the Trigger as a skill-conditioned policy: 

πθ (zt | xt, S) = Pθ (vt, i t, j t, ℓ t | ot, B t−1, H t−1, C t, S), (6) where S is a collection of embodied cognitive skills or rules. In practice, the policy is implemented through skill-augmented prompting, supervised fine-tuning, or their combination. The skill representation provides intermediate modeling: instead of directly mapping video to robot action, MindClaw first predicts a structured cognitive operation and then uses that operation to update memory, invoke reasoning, or generate the final action. We factor the trigger decision into operation selection and slot grounding: 

πθ (zt | xt, S) = Pθ (vt | xt, S)

· Pθ (it, j t, ℓ t | vt, x t, S). (7) The first term decides what kind of cognitive step is needed, such as belief update, reasoning, action generation, or no operation. The second term grounds this decision to a specific actor, object, and location under the candidate constraints. This factorization is useful because many errors arise not only from choosing the wrong verb, but also from grounding the operation to the wrong actor or object. The current operation space is 

Z = {belief_create_visual_fact (none , j, ℓ ),

belief_update_visual_fact (none , j, ℓ ),

belief_create_actor_belief (i, j, ℓ ),

belief_update_actor_belief (i, j, ℓ ),

reasoning_run (i, j, none ),

action_run (i, j, none ),

noop (none , none , none )}.

(8) Here i, j, and ℓ must be selected from the valid actor, object, and location candidates in Ct. This constrained output format turns trigger prediction into a controllable operation-selection and slot-grounding problem. The embodied cognitive skill follows three principles. First, observation precedes trigger decision: the system obtains ot

from the Observation module before deciding whether the belief table needs to be changed. Second, belief operations precede reasoning: if ot indicates a new visual fact or actor belief, the Trigger should select the corresponding belief-table operation before using that memory for mental-state inference. Third, mental reasoning precedes robot action: a belief mismatch alone is not enough; the system must decide whether the mismatch blocks the actor’s goal before invoking action generation. These principles prevent over-helping and make no-action a valid outcome. This formulation explains why the Trigger is the key component of MindClaw. If it emits noop when a belief update or reasoning call is needed, the system misses the chance to help. If it emits action_run too early, the robot may interrupt unnecessarily. By representing the trigger as an embodied cognitive skill, we can explicitly encode and learn the intermediate decisions that connect perception, memory, mental-state reasoning, and helpful action output. 

G. Skill Collection and Rule-Based Inference 

As shown in Figure 4, the skill set S used by the Trigger is collected from paired correct and incorrect rollouts. Each rollout contains the observation, memory state, model predic-tion, and target operation. We provide these paired cases to a strong LLM, such as GPT and Qwen3-4B [20], and ask it to summarize reusable decision patterns. Each summarized pattern is a candidate skill, for example a condition under which an actor belief should be created, a visual fact should be updated, or noop should be preferred. The raw skills are then validated over the full trajectory set and grouped by atomic operation. For each operation v ∈ Z ,we collect the skills that support that operation and organize them into three categories: 

Sv =  S+ 

> v

, S± 

> v

, S−

> v

 , (9) where S+ 

> v

contains strongly preferred conditions, S± 

> v

con-tains weaker preferred conditions, and S− 

> v

contains negative conditions. A strongly preferred condition means that when the condition is satisfied, the corresponding operation should be selected. A preferred condition provides evidence for the 7Strongly prefer  

> Prefer
> Negative conditions Rollout
> GPT/
> Qwen3-4b

...     

> Skill#1
> Skill#2
> Skill#N If `visual_facts[object] =
> held_by_charX` and
> `actor_beliefs[charX][object]` is
> absent... If the actor has no existing actor belief
> for the object, use
> `belief_create_actor_belief`; .... If `visual_facts` already contains the
> correct object-location pair, do not
> repeat ......
> belief_create_visual_fact
> Skill#1 Skill#5
> Skill#10 ...
> noop
> Skill#6 Skill#7
> Skill#N ...

... 

> belief_create_visual_fact
> Qwen3-4b Observation

Output 

Output Inference 

Skill Collection Process 

> Strongly prefer Rules
> Match
> Mismatch

Fig. 4: Skill Collection. We generate rules and collect skills from experiencemode operation but may require model judgment. A negative condi-tion rules out the operation even if some surface cues appear relevant. During inference, we use a two-stage procedure. First, the system applies deterministic matching for strongly preferred and negative conditions. The strict skills in S+ 

> v

are converted into regular-expression or structured-field matchers whenever possible. If a strong matcher fires and no negative condition blocks it, the system directly outputs the corresponding trigger operation. If no strong rule applies, the observation, memory, candidate slots, and the relevant preferred and negative skills are passed to the trigger model for skill-augmented prediction: 

zt =



Rv (xt), if Rv ∈ S + 

> v

matches and no R− ∈ S − 

> v

matches ,

arg max  

> z∈Z

πθ (z | xt, S), otherwise .

(10) This design combines precision and flexibility. Regex-style matching handles high-confidence cases that should not de-pend on model sampling. The skill-augmented trigger model handles ambiguous cases where multiple operations may be plausible or where the condition is not easily captured by a strict rule. This process turns error analysis into an explicit interme-diate representation. Instead of only fine-tuning on labels, we extract reusable embodied cognitive skills from correct and incorrect trajectories, validate them across all trajectories, sort them by atomic operation, and use them to guide inference. The resulting trigger is therefore both data-driven and skill-guided: strict skills provide deterministic shortcuts, while the learned trigger policy handles the remaining cases. V. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Setup and Metrics 

We evaluate MindClaw on MindPower Benchmark [8]. We mainly report three intervention metrics following the Mind-Power style: Task Accuracy (TA) , which measures whether the system understands the task target and relevant mental-state context; Precision Intervention Accuracy (PIA) , which measures whether the system intervenes only when assistance is needed; and Closed-loop / Action Satisfaction (CS) , which measures whether the generated action satisfies the closed-loop assistance goal. When inference, we utilize Qwen3-4B [20] as Trigger, and GPT-5.5 [21] as Observation, Mental Reasoning and action model. 

B. Baseline and MindClaw Results 

We first compare direct VLM baselines with MindClaw on the full embodied intervention task. As shown in Table II, direct video-language models struggle with both task under-standing and intervention calibration. Several models obtain near-zero TA, indicating frequent failures in identifying the relevant task target and mental-state context. PIA remains low across baselines, suggesting that visual recognition alone is in-sufficient for deciding whether assistance is needed. Although some models achieve high CS among triggered actions, this does not imply effective assistance, because they often fail to trigger intervention at the appropriate time. MindClaw provides a stronger and more balanced result. It improves TA and PIA over direct baselines while maintaining 100.00% CS, showing that better intervention timing and pre-cision can be achieved without sacrificing action validity. This result supports the need for an explicit intervention pipeline rather than direct video-to-action generation: the agent must 8

TABLE II: Compared with other models. Values are percent-ages. 

Model TA PIA CS GPT-5.4 [22] 3.80 8.70 100.00 Gemini 3.1 Pro [23] 2.25 15.60 76.10 Qwen3-VL-30B [24] 0.00 11.40 8.10 Qwen3-VL-8B [24] 0.00 0.00 –Qwen3-VL-4B [24] 0.00 1.10 100.00 VideoLLaMA3-7B [25] 0.50 19.30 22.20 InternVL3.5-8B [26] 0.00 0.90 0.00 Video-R1 [27] 0.00 6.80 68.80 OneThinker [28] 0.00 0.00 –VideoAuto-R1 [29] 0.00 3.50 33.30 MindClaw 14.36 36.63 100.00 

TABLE III: Belief-table ablation. 

Model w/ Belief Table w/o Belief Table Qwen3-4B [20] 9.51 1.64 GPT-5.5 [21] 20.32 18.75 

detect when assistance is required, maintain actor-specific belief states, and execute interventions in a closed loop. 

C. Ablation Studies 

What happens if the belief table is removed? The belief-table ablation evaluates whether the trigger can make reliable decisions without explicit belief-specific memory. Table III shows that removing the belief table strongly reduces Qwen3-4B performance from 9.51% to 1.64%. GPT-5.5 also decreases from 20.32% to 18.75%. 

What happens if the skill is removed? We next ablate the embodied cognitive skill used by the trigger. Without skill guidance, the model must directly predict the trigger tuple from the observation and memory. Table IV shows that adding skill rules improves Qwen3-4B from 46.51% to 77.71% overall accuracy and from 9.05% to 41.61% non-

noop accuracy. Combining supervised fine-tuning with skill guidance yields the strongest non-noop performance. This suggests that the skill is not just prompt decoration; it provides structured intermediate knowledge for deciding when to update memory, reason, act, or remain silent. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We presented MindClaw, a closed-loop framework for real-time interactive mental-state reasoning in embodied environ-ments. Within this framework, the agent can decide whether a person is acting under a false belief, hidden goal, or task-blocking mismatch, and can produce a reasonable helpful action when assistance is needed. We also introduced precision intervention as the central objective for embodied mental-state assistance. An embodied agent should not help by default. It should intervene at the right time, with the right target, and only when the current mental-state and environment state indicate that help is useful. To support this objective, we formulated the trigger as an embodied cognitive skill that mediates between observation, belief memory, mental reasoning, and action generation. By collecting and optimizing trigger skills, MindClaw improves the accuracy of intermediate cognitive-operation prediction and achieves the best reported performance in our experiments. TABLE IV: Trigger ablation. Values are percentages. 

Model ACC ACC w/o noop GPT-5.5 [21] 64.57 20.32 Gemini 3.1 Pro [23] 61.63 26.32 Qwen3-4B [20] 46.51 9.05 Qwen3-4B-Skill 77.71 41.61 Qwen3-4B-SFT 85.19 48.41 Qwen3-4B-SFT-Skill (GPT-5.5) 89.71 64.14 Qwen3-4B-SFT-Skill (Qwen3-4B) 88.76 60.54 

REFERENCES [1] A. M. Leslie, O. Friedman, and T. P. German, “Core mechanisms in ‘theory of mind’,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences , vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 528–533, 2004. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S1364661304002608 [2] K. Onishi and R. Baillargeon, “Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs?” Science (New York, N.Y.) , vol. 308, pp. 255–8, 05 2005. [3] C. Frith and U. Frith, “Theory of mind,” Current biology , vol. 15, no. 17, pp. R644–R645, 2005. [4] A. S. Rao, M. P. Georgeff et al. , “Bdi agents: From theory to practice.” in Icmas , vol. 95, 1995, pp. 312–319. [5] H. Shi, S. Ye, X. Fang, C. Jin, L. Isik, Y.-L. Kuo, and T. Shu, “Muma-tom: Multi-modal multi-agent theory of mind,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 39, no. 2, 2025, pp. 1510–1519. [6] C. Jin, Y. Wu, J. Cao, J. Xiang, Y.-L. Kuo, Z. Hu, T. Ullman, A. Torralba, J. Tenenbaum, and T. Shu, “MMToM-QA: Multimodal theory of mind question answering,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, and V. Srikumar, Eds. Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2024, pp. 16 077– 16 102. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.851/ [7] Y. Mao, X. Lin, Q. Ni, and L. He, “Bdiqa: A new dataset for video question answering to explore cognitive reasoning through theory of mind,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,vol. 38, no. 1, 2024, pp. 583–591. [8] R. Zhang, Q. Zheng, Z. Zhou, Z. Liao, S. Wu, J.-Y. Jiang-Lin, B. Wen, H. Xie, J. Fu, and W.-H. Cheng, “Mindpower: Enabling theory-of-mind reasoning in vlm-based embodied agents,” 2026. [9] Z. Cao, Z. Wang, S. Xie, A. Liu, and L. Fan, “Smart help: Strate-gic opponent modeling for proactive and adaptive robot assistance in households,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 18 091–18 101. [10] X. Puig, K. Ra, M. Boben, J. Li, T. Wang, S. Fidler, and A. Tor-ralba, “Virtualhome: Simulating household activities via programs,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2018, pp. 8494–8502. [11] C. Gan, J. Schwartz, S. Alter, M. Schrimpf, J. Traer, J. De Freitas, J. Kubilius, A. Bhandwaldar, N. Haber, M. Sano et al. , “Threedworld: A platform for interactive multi-modal physical simulation,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2021. [12] H. Kim, M. Sclar, X. Zhou, R. Bras, G. Kim, Y. Choi, and M. Sap, “Fantom: A benchmark for stress-testing machine theory of mind in interactions,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2023, pp. 14 397–14 413. [13] Y. Wu, Y. He, Y. Jia, R. Mihalcea, Y. Chen, and N. Deng, “Hi-ToM: A benchmark for evaluating higher-order theory of mind reasoning in large language models,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , H. Bouamor, J. Pino, and K. Bali, Eds. Singapore: Association for Computational Linguistics, Dec. 2023, pp. 10 691–10 706. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-emnlp.717/ [14] OpenClaw Contributors, “Openclaw: Personal ai assistant,” https:// github.com/openclaw/openclaw, 2026, open-source software. [15] R. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhu, K. Chen, J. Wang, S. Wang, K. Hu, M. Yu, B. Jiang, Z. Su, J. Ma, X. He, Y. Shen, Yangyang, G. Ren, M. Yao, W. Wang, and Y. Mu, “Roboclaw: An agentic framework for scalable long-horizon robotic tasks,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.11558 [16] D. Huo, H. Liu, G. Liu, D. Qi, Z. Sun, M. Gao, J. He, Y. Yang, X. Chang, F. Xiong, X. Wei, Z. Ma, and M. Xu, “Abot-claw: A foundation for persistent, cooperative, and self-evolving robotic agents,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.10096 9

[17] K. Gandhi, J.-P. Fr¨ anken, T. Gerstenberg, and N. Goodman, “Under-standing social reasoning in language models with language models,” 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, pp. 13 518–13 529, 2023. [18] X. Li, S. Liu, B. Zou, J. Chen, and H. Ma, “From black boxes to transparent minds: Evaluating and enhancing the theory of mind in multimodal large language models,” in Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=CDillQjA7N [19] X. Fan, X. Zhou, C. Jin, K. Nottingham, H. Zhu, and M. Sap, “Somi-tom: Evaluating multi-perspective theory of mind in embodied social interactions,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=7zFLFtqBm0 [20] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao, C. Huang, C. Lv, C. Zheng, D. Liu, F. Zhou, F. Huang, F. Hu, H. Ge, H. Wei, H. Lin, J. Tang, J. Yang, J. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Yang, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Dang, K. Bao, K. Yang, L. Yu, L. Deng, M. Li, M. Xue, M. Li, P. Zhang, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Men, R. Gao, S. Liu, S. Luo, T. Li, T. Tang, W. Yin, X. Ren, X. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Ren, Y. Fan, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wan, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Cui, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and Z. Qiu, “Qwen3 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. [21] OpenAI, “Gpt-5.5 system card,” https://openai.com/index/ gpt-5-5-system-card/, 2026, accessed: 2026-05-31. [22] ——, “Gpt-5.4 thinking system card,” https://openai.com/index/ gpt-5-4-thinking-system-card/, 2026, accessed: 2026-05-31. [23] Gemini Team, “Gemini 3.1 Pro Model Card,” https://deepmind.google/ models/model-cards/gemini-3-1-pro/, 2026, google DeepMind Techni-cal Report. Accessed: 2026-05-31. [24] S. Bai, Y. Cai, R. Chen, K. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Cheng, L. Deng, W. Ding, C. Gao, C. Ge, W. Ge, Z. Guo, Q. Huang, J. Huang, F. Huang, B. Hui, S. Jiang, Z. Li, M. Li, M. Li, K. Li, Z. Lin, J. Lin, X. Liu, J. Liu, C. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Liu, S. Liu, D. Lu, R. Luo, C. Lv, R. Men, L. Meng, X. Ren, X. Ren, S. Song, Y. Sun, J. Tang, J. Tu, J. Wan, P. Wang, P. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Xie, Y. Xu, H. Xu, J. Xu, Z. Yang, M. Yang, J. Yang, A. Yang, B. Yu, F. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, B. Zheng, H. Zhong, J. Zhou, F. Zhou, J. Zhou, Y. Zhu, and K. Zhu, “Qwen3-vl technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 , 2025. [25] B. Zhang, K. Li, Z. Cheng, Z. Hu, Y. Yuan, G. Chen, S. Leng, Y. Jiang, H. Zhang, X. Li, P. Jin, W. Zhang, F. Wang, L. Bing, and D. Zhao, “Videollama 3: Frontier multimodal foundation models for image and video understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13106 ,2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.13106 [26] W. Wang, Z. Gao, L. Gu, H. Pu, L. Cui, X. Wei, Z. Liu, L. Jing, S. Ye, J. Shao et al. , “Internvl3.5: Advancing open-source multi-modal models in versatility, reasoning, and efficiency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18265 , 2025. [27] K. Feng, K. Gong, B. Li, Z. Guo, Y. Wang, T. Peng, B. Wang, and X. Yue, “Video-r1: Reinforcing video reasoning in mllms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21776 , 2025. [28] K. Feng, M. Zhang, H. Li, K. Fan, S. Chen, Y. Jiang, D. Zheng, P. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Sun et al. , “Onethinker: All-in-one reasoning model for image and video,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.03043 , 2025. [29] S. Liu, M. Zhuge, C. Zhao, J. Chen, L. Wu, Z. Liu, C. Zhu, Z. Cai, C. Zhou, H. Liu, E. Chang, S. Suri, H. Xu, Q. Qian, W. Wen, B. Varadarajan, Z. Liu, H. Xu, F. Bordes, R. Krishnamoor-thi, B. Ghanem, V. Chandra, and Y. Xiong, “Videoauto-r1: Video auto reasoning via thinking once, answering twice,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05175 , 2026.