Title: 2607.20772v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.20772v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Jul 2026 00:19:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
1

# Socially Consistent Multi -Robot Navigation Using 

# Decoupled Planning and Trajectory Coordination 

Matthew M. Sato 1

Engineering Informatics Group 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering 

Stanford University 

Stanford, CA 94305 

email: satomm@stanford.edu 

Kincho H. Law 

Engineering Informatics Group 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering 

Stanford University 

Stanford, CA 94305 

e-mail: law@stanford.edu 

ABSTRACT 

The successful integration of mobile robots in human -centric environments requires 

navigat ion that is not only safe and efficient , but also predictable and aligned with social 

conventions, key precursors for human comfort and acceptance. While significant research 

addresses short -term human -aware planning, these methods often lack mechanisms for ensuring 

consistent and predictable behaviors across long horizons . Without socially aware long -term 

planner s, local planners are over burden ed , resulting in inefficient and locally reactive movements 

that undermine predictability . This paper introduces a partially decentralized framework that 

generat es predictable and socially consistent multi -robot motion by decoupl ing global path 

planning from trajectory coordination . First, we propose a modified A* planner that embeds 

macroscopic social norms into the planner cost function. Planned paths are shared across mobile  

> 1Corresponding author

2

robots to collaboratively build a social graph of established routes, which enforc es path 

consistency and reduces future plannin g effort . Second, we leverage the emergent structure of the 

socially constrained paths to formulate the multi -robot trajectory coordination problem as a 

mixed -integer convex program. The convex program enables efficient computation of conflict - free 

trajectories, scaling effectively to large fleets and supporting dynamic task assignment. Our results 

demonstrate that enforcing social consistency at the path planning stage produces predictable ,

socially compliant mobile robot paths and simplif ies the otherwise complex problem of multi -robot 

coordinatio n.

Keywords: path planning, multi -robot trajectory coordination, social navigation 

1. INTRODUCTION 

The rapid improvements in artificial intelligence and robotics hardware are enabling the 

deployment of autonomous mobile robots in increasingly complex and human -centric 

environments, including restaurants, warehouses, and airports. To enable and encourage 

widespread adoption, mobile robots should be seamless , safe, and accepted by humans . Human 

acceptance of mobile robots is highly depend ent on the robot ’s motion , with humans concerned 

with both the actual and perceived level of comfort and safety around mobile robots [1], [2] .

Mobile robot motion that is aggressive or unpredictable could therefore lead to the rejection or 

delayed integration of mobile robot s in human environments. Thus, d eveloping motion planning 

algorithms that account for human concerns is a critical prerequisite for the widespread adoption 

of mobile robots in human spaces .

A significant body of work focuses on human -aware navigation, aiming to generate safe 

mobile robot behaviors that respect human space [2]. However, existing works primarily focus on 3

the local planner , the planning component responsible for short -term , reactive adjustments within 

the robot’s immediate sensor range. In contrast, a map -level or global planner computes a complete 

path from a robot’s starting position to its goal across the entire environment, before any motion 

begins. The focus of prior work on local planners , while important for obstacle avoidance , does 

not induce socially preferred behaviors that are consistent and intuitive over long horizons . Social 

norms such as keeping to the right or left side of a hallway are long -term path choice s that must 

be determined at the map level and are not reactive adjustment s. Path planners that only address 

social compliance in the local planner have no mechanism to enforce map -level conventions, 

leading to paths that, while locally safe, may be erratic or inefficient. Moreover, the absence of a

social ly aware map -level planner can place an undue burden on local planners by forcing frequent 

reactive maneuvers to maintain safety, degrad ing the efficiency and perceived predictability of 

mobile robots. 

This paper addresses the problem of planning coordinated, socially compliant paths for a 

fleet of mobile robots operating in shared human -centric spaces. The problem has two tightly 

coupled components: path planning and multi -robot trajectory coordination. First, mobile robots 

must plan paths that conform to the social conventions of the environment. Second, multiple 

mobile robots must coordinate their movement to avoid collision, without sacrificing the social 

structure of their individual routes. Multi -robot coordination is a difficult combinatorial problem 

whose solution space grows exponentially with the number of robots, and existing approaches 

ignore social conventions entirely [3], [4], [5] . Our insight is that social conventions, rather than 

being a complication, simplify the trajectory coordination task. By restricting mobile robots to a 

structured set of shared behaviors, the space of possible conflict s is reduced to only a few scenarios, 

creating a tractable trajectory coordination problem. 4

As demonstrated in Figure 1 , this paper develops a global planner by introducing a 

framework that encourages mobile robot motion to be consistent with social conventions and 

predictable over long horizons , rather than optimizing for shortest path routes . By providing 

mobile robot behavior that humans can anticipate , mobile robots can reduce uncertainty and 

improv e human comfort [1], [6] . We achieve s ocial consistency by embedding macroscopic human 

behavior norms into the global path planning process. Predictability is enforced th rough fleet -wide 

communication, where robots collaboratively build and adhere to a shared set of common paths .

By ensuring mobile robot trajectories are repeatable while adher ing to social conventions , our 

approach creates a structured and intuitive shared environment for both humans and mobile robots .

We emphasize that the social norms used in this work are not universal laws, but rather a 

representative set of conventions commonly adopted or accepted at a particular place (e.g., in the 

United States). The framework to be presented is not limited to the conventions in this paper and 

can be extended to reflect other social norms. We further clarify that global planning refers to path 

planning across the full geometry space of an environment, not to any claim that the social norms 

themselves are universal. 

The structure of consistent and predictable mobile robot paths provides the foundation for 

our second contribution: a scalable multi -robot coordination strategy. We formulate the 

coordination problem as a mixed -integer convex optimization program that assigns collision free 

arrival times at conflict waypoints along each mobile robot’s path . Importantly, the social path 

structure limits conflicts to well defined locations (intersections, along the same path, or in 

opposite traffic along a narrow hallway) . By restricting the number of conflict points, our 

formulation remains tractable even as the fleet size grows because the number of optimization 

variables grows with the number of possible collisions, not with path length or path resolution. 5

The convex formulation further allows the problem to be solved both simultaneously for multiple 

mobile robots dispatched together, or sequentially as new mobile robots are added to an already 

operating fleet .

In summary, this paper’s contributions are :

• A global path planning framework that explicitly incorporates macroscopic human social 

norms to generate efficient and socially conforming paths. 

• A mechanism for achieving fleet -wide path consistency and predictability through inter -

robot communication .

• The formulation of the multi -robot coordination problem as a mixed -integer convex 

program, enabling an efficient and scalable method for generating coordinated, conflict -

free trajectories. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews related works, Section 3 

details the proposed methodology for path planning and control, Section 4 presents the results from 

simulated mobile robot experiments, Section 5 provides a n experimental demonstration on 

hardware, and Section 6 contains concluding remarks. 

2. RELATED WORKS 

Mobile robot path planning is a foundational problem in robotics, with extensive research 

dedicated to finding computationally efficient and optimal paths. Classic algorithms such as A* 

[7] , Rapidly -exploring Random Tree s (RRT*) [8] , and Probabilistic Roadmap s (PRM) [9] provide 

the bedrock for many modern motion planners . These algorithms excel at finding optimal paths 

according to a defined cost function, which is typically path length or travel time . However, these 

algorithms do not inherently consider the social context of navigating in human -centric 

environments or provide the means for determining multi -robot trajectories . This section reviews 6

three areas of related research that are relevant to th e methods presented in this work : multi -robot 

coordination, single robot social navigation, and learning -based social navigation approaches. 

2.1 Multi -Robot Path Planning and Coordination 

Coordinating the motion of multiple mobile robots, termed multi -agent path finding 

(MAPF), is a computationally challenging problem. These methods can be broadly separated into 

centralized and decentralized approaches. Centralized planners aim to find the globally optimal 

solution for the entire fleet. Conflict -based search (CBS) [3] and its variants are prominent optimal 

solvers that first plan individual paths, and then resolve collisions with a search tree. However, the 

computational complexity of CBS grows large with the number of conflicts. Priority motion 

planning [4] offers a computationally simpler alternative by assigning a fixed priority to robots 

and planning paths sequentially. However, priority planning can lead to suboptimal solutions 

where low -priority robots take excessively long paths. Meanwhile, decentralized planners focus 

on local interaction for scalability. Optimal reciprocal collision avoidance (ORCA) [5] and it s non -

holonomic extension (NH -ORCA) [10] are state -of -the -art reactive methods. Each agent 

independently computes collision -free velocities based on the current state of its neighbors. ORCA 

is scalable and effective at preventing immediate collisions . Both the centralized and decentralized 

approaches are effective at solving the multi -robot coordination problem, but ignore social 

conventions, which may lead to undesirable behavior in human -centric environments. 

2.2 Single Robot Social Navigation 

A large body of research has focused on socially aware single robot navigation . Much of 

the socially aware mobile robot work is based on proxemics [11] , the sociological study of human 

spatial behavior and the rules that define the personal spaces of humans. Many approaches 7

integrate the concepts of proxemics into the mobile robot path planning framework. A common 

approach is the social force model [12] , which models humans as particles subject to attractive and 

repulsive forces . Planners can incorporate the social force model directly or to generate a social 

cost map that penalizes moving too close to humans [13], [14], [15] . Other methods use sensor 

data, such as from fixed external cameras, to generate a heatmap of human activity and direct 

mobile robots to areas that are less crowded [16] . Other single robot approaches modify local 

trajectory optimizers to incorporate social rules. Methods based on the timed elastic band (TEB) 

algorithm dynamically adjust mobile robot trajectories to maintain appropriate distances from 

humans, anticipate their movements, and adhere to social norms [17], [18], [19]. While effective 

for single -robot interactions, these methods focus on local navigation and do not address multi -

robot coordination or enforce fleet -wide consistency. 

2.3 Learning -Based Social Navigation 

To move beyond hand -crafted social rules, researchers have turned to reinforcement 

learning (RL) . Inverse RL has been used to learn a social cost function from human 

demonstrations, allowing mobile robots to mimic human behaviors while path planning [20] . Other 

approaches use deep RL to guide mobile robot navigation. Approaches such as s ocially aware 

collision avoidance with deep reinforcement learning (SA -CADRL) [21] and crowd aware 

navigation with deep reinforcement learning [22] train a deep neural network to serve as the control 

policy, mapping sensor inputs to actions. Deep RL can produce sophisticated behaviors learned 

from simulation or real -world data. A comprehensive review of deep RL techniques for social 

navigation can be found in [23] . However, learning -based methods have limitations. Namely, the 

black -box nature of RL approaches can make mobile robot behavior difficult to predict or 

guarantee, which is counter to the goals of this work. Furthermore, learning -based approaches 8

typically focus on ego -centric local intera ctions and do not enforce the global consistency that is 

an objective of this work. 

Our work bridges the gap between social navigation and multi -robot coordination by 

integrat ing social navigation with multi -robot trajectories :

• Unlike CBS or ORCA, our approach explicitly embed s social norms into the global 

planning phase, generating plans that are collision free, socially consistent, and predictable. 

• We introduce a learned social graph buil t through inter -robot communication to enforce 

fleet -wide consistency among individual mobile robots and to improve planning efficiency. 

• By leveraging the emergent structure of social paths, we formulate the coordination 

problem as a scalable convex optimization problem. Our approach provides more globally 

aware solutions as compared to reactive methods like ORCA, while being more scalable 

and flexible than centralized solvers such as CBS. 

3. METHODS 

This section details our proposed framework for socially consistent multi -robot navigation 

and trajectory coordination . Our approach decouples the complex navigation task into distinct, 

sequential s tages as shown in Figure 2 . In Section 3.2, we de scribe how each mobile robot 

independently plans a socially compliant geometric path. The first stage determin es the mobile 

robot s’ route s, using a modified A* planner and a shared social graph to ensure fleet -wide 

consistency and computational efficiency. Then, in Section 3.3, we detail how the mobile robots 

coordinate trajectory arrival times of the planned paths using a mixed -integer convex program 

(MICP ). 

3.1 Preliminaries: Map Representation and Planning Space 9

Our framework operates within a known, static 2D environment . The e nvironment is 

represented as a n occupancy grid , where space is discretized into cells labeled as occupied, free, 

or unknown. We assume the map has been construct ed a priori using a mapping algorithm such as 

simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [24] . We assume a static map since the focus of 

this paper is on global path planning and trajectory generation. For dynamic objects such as 

humans, local approaches such as those introduced in Section 2 can be used together with our 

approach to provide a complete navigation solution . To simplify the pathfinding problem, we 

transform the occupancy grid into configuration space (C -space) [25] . In C -space, obstacles are 

inflated by the mobile robot’s radius , allow ing the planner to treat the mobile robots as point 

masses and simplifying the navigation problem. 

3.2 Global Path Generation 

The first stage of our framework determines a feasible and socially aware geometric path 

for each mobile robot. While each mobile robot plans independently, the fleet achieves emergent 

cooperation through two mechanisms detailed in this s ection: a shared understanding of social 

norms encoded in a cost function (Section 3.2.1) and a collaboratively built social graph that 

enforces consistency across mobile robots (Section 3.2.2) .

3.2.1 Socially Compliant Path Planning for a Single Robot 

The core of our single robot path plann er is a modified A* search algorithm [7] operating 

on the C -space grid. We use the A* search algorithm because of the flexibility of the cost function ,

optimality guarantees, and the deterministic nature of the algorithm . We modify the A* cost 

function to shift from finding the shortest path to finding a path that balances path length with 

adherence to social norms. 10 

As summarized in Algorithm 1, A* finds a path by iteratively expanding the node  𝑥  which 

minimizes the function  𝑓 (𝑥 ) = 𝑔 (𝑥 ) + ℎ(𝑥 ), where  𝑔 (𝑥 ) is the accumulated cost from the start 

node to  𝑥 , and  ℎ(𝑥 ) is a heuristic estimate of the cost from  𝑥  to the goal. We use the Manhattan 

distance as the heuristic: 

ℎ(𝑥 ) = ‖𝑥 goal − 𝑥 ‖1 (1)

which is consistent and admissible, guaranteeing that A* finds the lowest cost path based on the 

cost function  𝑔 (⋅) [7] .

We embed social norms through the definition of the edge cost,  𝑐 (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ), which is the cost 

the mobile robot incurs when transitioning from  𝑥 ′ to  𝑥 . The cost function is  𝑔 (𝑥 ) = 𝑔 (𝑥 ′) +

𝑐 (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ): the cost of previously visited node  𝑥 ′ and the edge cost to reach  𝑥  from  𝑥 ′. T o enforce 

social behavior while also achieving short path distances, we define the edge cost as a combination 

of Euclidian distance and a social cost , 𝜙 (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ):

𝑐 (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ) = ‖𝑥 − 𝑥 ′‖2 + 𝜙 (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ). (2)

The social cost  𝜙  translates abstract social rules into a numerical penalty. In this work, we 

implement three social components that follow social convention in the United States: 

𝜙 (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ) = 𝑤 right 𝐶 right (𝑥 ) + 𝑤 const 𝐶 const (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ) + 𝑤 buf 𝐶 buf (𝑥 ) (3)

where: 

• 𝐶 right (𝑥 ) enforces a keep -right behavior. The cost can be defined as the distance to the 

nearest obstacle on the right,  𝑑 right (𝑥 ). For example,  𝐶 right (𝑥 ) = 𝑑 right (𝑥 ) penalizes any 

path far from the right wall. 

• 𝐶 const (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ) promotes smooth , parallel motion by penaliz ing changes in the distance to the 

right wall between steps : 𝐶 const (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ) = 𝑑 right (𝑥 ) − 𝑑 right (𝑥 ′).11 

• 𝐶 buf (𝑥 ) is active in wide -open areas (where  𝑑 right (𝑥 ) exceeds a threshold).  𝐶 buf  encourages 

leaving a buffer for oncoming traffic by penalizing proximity to the left wall:  𝐶 buf (𝑥 ) =

max (0, 𝑑 buf − 𝑑 left (𝑥 )), where  𝑑 buf  is the desired buffer width .

The non -negative weights  𝑤 right , 𝑤 const , and  𝑤 buf  can be tuned for different environments 

and social conventions. The social cost weights are set to zero for all nodes within a certain radius 

of the start and goal positions , which prevents penalizing necessary maneuvers at the beginning or 

end of a path . The performance of the social planner depends on the selection of the weights and 

threshold in the cost function. While these parameters can be learned, for our work we select them 

as follows:  𝑤 right  and  𝑤 buf  are weighted highest to establish strong lane discipline, followed by 

𝑤 const  to prevent jagged paths . Last,  𝑑 buf  should be larger than the robot diameter to ensure 

adequate passing clearance. We emphasize these social cost functions are just one set of possible 

cost functions, and any cost function can be substituted to achieve the desired social behavior. 

3.2.2 A Learned Social Graph for Fleet -Wide Path Consistency 

The single robot planner from Section 3.2.1 encourages each path to be socially complian t,

but the planner has two main limitations when operating in a multi -robot setting : a large 

computational expens e when computing the social cost  𝜙  and no guarantee for path consistency 

between mobile robots. To address both issues, we introduce a mechanism for the robot fleet to 

collaboratively learn a directed subgraph, which we call a social graph. The social graph represents 

the established, socially compliant routes in the environment. Planning over the much smaller 

social graph is significantly faster and enforces consistent path choices across the entire fleet .

The social graph,  𝐻 (𝑉 𝐻 , 𝐸 𝐻 ), is built and refined dynamically during robot operations 

through a three -step process :12 

1)  Path Aggregation : Every successfully planned path is broadcast to other mobile robots. 

Each mobile robot maintains a set of eight directional heatmaps , one for each cardinal and 

intercardinal grid direction (north , northeast , west , etc.) . When a path is received, the 

corresponding heatmap cell is incremented for each segment of the path . The distinction 

between directions distinguishes between traffic moving in opposite directions within the 

same hallway, preventing the creation of a single lane highway. 

2)  Subgraph Extraction : Periodically, the directional heatmaps are processed to form the 

social graph. A directed edge, (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ), is added to the social graph,  𝐻 , if  𝑥 ′ and  𝑥  are 

adjacent and the value in the corresponding directional heatmap exceeds a predefined 

threshold. Edges added to the social graph are given edge weights equal to the Euclidean 

distance between the two nodes, ‖𝑥 − 𝑥 ′‖2.

3)  Graph Pruning : To filter noise from transient or exploratory paths, the extracted social 

graph is pruned. The social graph’s weakly connected components are computed and any 

components with a node count below a minimum node size threshold are discarded . The 

pruning step ensures  𝐻  contains only well -established, significant trajectories, improving 

robustness to one -off path deviations .

Once computed, the social graph  𝐻  biases future path planning. The A* global planner ’s 

edge cost function is modified to favor paths along the social graph, with the new edge function: 

𝑐 ′(𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ) = {‖𝑥 − 𝑥 ′‖2, (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ) ∈ 𝐸 𝐻 

𝑐 (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ) + 𝜀 , ot herwise (4)

where  𝑐 (𝑥 ′, 𝑥 ) is the original edge cost function from Eq. 2 that incorporates social cost,  𝐸 𝐻  is the 

set of edges in the social graph  𝐻 , and  𝜀  is a small positive penalty. 13 

The modified cost function creates a powerful exploration -exploitation trade -off. By 

default, the planner exploits the social graph, as traversing edges in  𝐸 𝐻  incurs only the distance 

cost, making paths along the social graph highly attractive. However, the planner can still explore 

routes off the social graph by paying the original social cost plus the  𝜀  penalty. The planner can 

still find and adopt a new, superior path if one is consistently discovered, but the  𝜀  penalty 

discourages minor, inefficient deviations from established routes. The value of  𝜀  directly controls 

the planner’s incentive to adhere to the existing social graph routes and  𝜀  must be carefully selected 

depending on the desired mobile robot behavior. 

3.3 Decentralized Conflict -Free Trajectory Coordination 

After establishing the geometric paths in Section 3.2, we comput e conflict -free trajectories 

for a fleet of  𝑅  mobile robot s following these paths . Each robot must receive a schedule of arrival 

times along its planned path such that no two robots occupy the same space simultaneously , which 

would lead to collision . We leverage the emergent structure of the socially constrained path s to 

formulate the trajectory coordination problem as a mixed -integer convex program (MICP) [26]. 

Unlike generic shortest -path planners, our social path planner produces routes that behave like a 

road network, concentrating potential collision points at a smaller set of predictable locations: 

intersections, opposing direction corridors, and same direction lanes . With the social path structure ,

the number of collision avoidance constraints increases with the number of possible robot 

collisions , rather than with path length or resolution, maintaining a tractable MICP even for large 

fleets. Further, the MICP formulation is flexible, supporting both sequential and simultaneous 

planning scenarios, suiting real -world deployments where mobile robots are dispatched on a 

rolling basis .14 

3.3.1 Problem Setup: Event Waypoint s and Encounter Windows 

The social path planner provides each mobile robot  𝑟  with an ordered sequence of 

waypoints,  𝑃 𝑟 = (𝑝 1

> 𝑟

, … , 𝑝 𝑁 𝑟  

> 𝑟

). Rather than solving for the arrival times at every path waypoint, 

which scales linearly with path resolution, the MICP optimizes over a sparse set of event 

waypoints , 𝑊 𝑟 ⊆ 𝑃 𝑟  . Event waypoints are selected based on their relevance to possible robot 

collisions and form a subset of waypoints that are sufficient to capture all relevant timing decisions. 

Between consecutive event waypoints, each robot is assumed to travel at constant velocity, and all 

remaining arrival times are recovered through interpolation. 

The event waypoint set  𝑊 𝑟  for mobile robot  𝑟  is constructed from the set of full path 

waypoints as illustrated in Figure 3 . The start and goal waypoints are always included in  𝑊 𝑟 . For 

every other robot  𝑠 ≠ 𝑟 , we identify all pairs of path segments from robots  𝑟  and  𝑠  that are within 

a specified distance of each other and would lead to a collision ( within robot diameter  𝑑 ). 

Contiguous conflicting segments on robot  𝑟 ’s path are merged into a single encounter window ,

𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑠 ), with entry and exit points  𝑝 enter  

> 𝑟𝑠

, 𝑝 exit  

> 𝑟𝑠

∈ 𝑃 𝑟  . The entry and exit waypoints from every 

encounter window , together with the start and goal waypoints, form  𝑊 𝑟 . Let  𝐾 𝑟 = |𝑊 𝑟 | be the 

number of event waypoints and in dex the event waypoints as  𝑘 = 1, … , 𝐾 𝑟  in path order. Then, the 

decision variables for robot  𝑟  are the event waypoint arrival times  𝑡 𝑟 = (𝑡 1 

> 𝑟

, … , 𝑡 𝐾 𝑟  

> 𝑟

). Auxiliary 

constants used in the constraints are the arc length s from the start to the  𝑘 -th event waypoint and 

are denoted  𝑠 𝑘 

> 𝑟

. The arc length between event waypoints  𝑘  and  𝑘 + 1 is  ℓ𝑘  

> 𝑟

= 𝑠 𝑘 +1 

> 𝑟

− 𝑠 𝑘 

> 𝑟

.

Because the social path planner leads to consistent and separated lanes, we classify each 

encounter window  𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑠 ) into one of the following three types of encounters: 15 

• Intersection : Both robot s’ conflict arc lengths are short (below a threshold) , meaning the 

robots cross at a point rather than sharing a corridor. One robot must fully clear the 

encounter window before the other enters. 

• Opposite Direction : The robots travers e the same corridor segment in opposing direction s

(detected by anti -diagonal structure in the conflicting waypoint index pairs ). One robot 

must fully clear the corridor before the other enters .

• Same Direction : The robots travel along the same corridor in the same direction , often 

along the exact same path due to the social graph. A consistent leader -follower ordering is 

enforced (the leading robot must remain ahead of the following robot) throughout the entire 

encounter window .

3.3.2 MICP Constraints 

The MICP optimizes the event waypoint arrival times for all mobile robots, subject to 

constraints along their planned social paths. The MICP contains two classes of linear constraints: 

kinematic constraints and collision avoidance constraints. 

Kinematic Constraints : Each mobile robot must not exceed its maximum speed , 𝑉 max  

> 𝑟

, to operate 

safely and within the physical limits of mobile robots. The constant velocity assumption provides 

a minimum traversal time between each event waypoint based upon the arc length between 

cons ecutive event waypoints: 

𝑡 𝑘 +1 

> 𝑟

− 𝑡 𝑘  

> 𝑟

≥ ℓ𝑘 

> 𝑟

𝑉 max  

> 𝑟

, 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝐾 𝑟 − 1 (5)

with boundary condition  𝑡 1 

> 𝑟

= 0 for all  𝑟 .16 

Collision Avoidance Constraints : For each encounter window , 𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑠 ), let  𝑘 enter  

> 𝑟𝑠

and  𝑘 exit  

> 𝑟𝑠

denote 

the event waypoint indices on robot  𝑟  corresponding to the entry and exit of the conflict zone with 

robot  𝑠 . Similarly, let  𝑘 enter  

> 𝑠𝑟

and  𝑘 exit  

> 𝑠𝑟

denote the corresponding event waypoint indices for robot  𝑠 .

A time safety margin  𝛿 > 0 enforces a temporal buffer between mobile robots reaching event 

waypoints that would cause collision and should be chosen based on the mobile robot’s control 

fidelity and timing uncertainties. We now describe the collision constraints required under the three 

encounter window classifications. 

For intersection and opposite direction encounters, one robot must fully exit the conflict 

zone before the other enters , but the order in which the robots traverse the conflict zone is not 

specified . This either -or co nstraint creates a logical disjunction, which is not directly solvable in a 

convex program. We encode the disjunctive constraint s into the MICP using a large positive 

constant  𝑀  and a single binary variable  𝑧 𝑟𝑠 ∈ {0,1} (the Big -M method ), a standard technique for 

handling logical disjunctive constraints in mixed -integer programs [27] :

𝑡 𝑘 exit  

> 𝑟𝑠
> 𝑟

≤ 𝑡 𝑘 enter  

> 𝑠𝑟
> 𝑠

− 𝛿 + 𝑀 𝑧 𝑟𝑠 (6𝑎 )

𝑡 𝑘 exit  

> 𝑠𝑟
> 𝑠

≤ 𝑡 𝑘 enter  

> 𝑟𝑠
> 𝑟

− 𝛿 + 𝑀 (1 − 𝑧 𝑟𝑠 ) (6𝑏 )

The Big -M method ensures that both Eq. 6a and Eq. 6b hold , but only one of the constraints is 

active . When  𝑧 𝑟𝑠 = 0, Eq. 6b is trivially satisfied and robot  𝑟  exits the conflict zone before robot 

𝑠  enters . W hen  𝑧 𝑟𝑠 = 1, Eq. 6a is trivi ally satisfied and robot  𝑠  exits the conflict zone first. The 

MICP solver select s the ordering of robots to traverse the encounter window that minimizes the 

objective (which we will formally define in Section 3.3.3 ). Exactly one binary variable is required 

per encounter window .

For same direction encounters, a leader -follower ordering is enforced within the encounter 

windows. Mobile robots are allowed to be within the same encounter window simultaneously but 17 

must maintain a strict ordering to prevent collisions. The leader -follower ordering is imposed at 

every event waypoint within the encounter window, not only at the entry and exit event waypoints 

associated with the encounter window . For example, if an encounter window  𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑡 ) begins or 

ends within  𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑠 ), an event waypoint associated with  𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑡 ) lies within  𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑠 ) and the leader -

follower ordering must also be obeyed at this intermediate event waypoint . Let  𝒦 𝑟𝑠  denote the 

ordered set of event waypoint index pairs  (𝑘 𝑟 , 𝑘 𝑠 ), such that  𝑘 𝑟  is the index for a robot  𝑟  event 

waypoint that lies the same direction encounter window  𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑠 ) and  𝑘 𝑠  is the corresponding event 

waypoint index on robot  𝑠  at the same normalized arc length distance in the encounter. The leader -

follower constraints for encounter window  𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑠 ) are again disjunctive :

𝑡 𝑘 𝑟  

> 𝑟

≤ 𝑡 𝑘 𝑠  

> 𝑠

− 𝛿 + 𝑀 𝑧 𝑟𝑠 , ∀ (𝑘 𝑟 , 𝑘 𝑠 ) ∈ 𝒦 𝑟𝑠 (7𝑎 )

𝑡 𝑘 𝑠  

> 𝑠

≤ 𝑡 𝑘 𝑟  

> 𝑟

− 𝛿 + 𝑀 (1 − 𝑧 𝑟𝑠 ), ∀ (𝑘 𝑟 , 𝑘 𝑠 ) ∈ 𝒦 𝑟𝑠 (7𝑏 )

The constraints in Eq. 7 maintain consistent robot ordering at every shared event waypoint in the 

encounter window, preventing a collision between mobile robots traveling in the same direction 

under the assumption of constant velocity between event waypoints . Note that the same binary 

variable  𝑧 𝑟𝑠  is used for all pairs in  𝒦 𝑟𝑠 , enforcing a consistent leader -follower ordering throughout 

the entire encounter window. 

Special Cases: When the start waypoint of robot  𝑟  is also an entry waypoint of an encounter 

window  𝐸 (𝑟 , 𝑠 ), the ordering must be fixed : robot  𝑟  must depart first to prevent a stalemate. 

Similarly, if the goal waypoint of robot  𝑟  coincides with an e xit waypoint , robot  𝑟  must reach the 

goal after any other robot that has conflict at that location . These fixed ordering boundary 

conditions eliminate the need for a binary variable in the effected encounter, reducing the number 

of integer variables and simplifying the MICP. Furthermore, i f robots  𝑟  and  𝑠  have multiple disjoint 

encounter windows, each window must use its own binary variable .18 

Big -M Constant ( 𝑴 ): The constant  𝑀  must be large enough to ensure the in active constraint is 

non -binding, but not so large as to cause numerical instability in the solver. We compute  𝑀 

dynamically as a n upper bound on the total mission horizon :

𝑀 = 2 ∑ ∑ ℓ𝑘 

> 𝑟

𝑉 max 

> 𝑟
> 𝑘 𝑟

(8)

which yield s a 𝑀  on the order of twice the maximum possible single robot completion time ,

providing a bound that avoids numerical instability from arbitrarily chose n large, fixed constants .

3.3. 3 MICP Formulation 

The complete MICP is formalized as 

minimize  ∑ 𝑡 𝐾 𝑟 

> 𝑟
> 𝑅
> 𝑟 =1

subject to  𝑡 1 

> 𝑟

= 0 ∀ 𝑟 

𝑡 𝑘 +1 

> 𝑟

− 𝑡 𝑘  

> 𝑟

≥ ℓ𝑘 

> 𝑟

𝑉 max  

> 𝑟

𝑘 = 1, … , 𝐾 𝑟 − 1; ∀ 𝑟  (5)

𝑡 𝑘 exit  

> 𝑟𝑠
> 𝑟

≤ 𝑡 𝑘 enter  

> 𝑠𝑟
> 𝑠

− 𝛿 + 𝑀 𝑧 𝑟𝑠  ∀ intersection/opposite encounters, 

(𝑟 , 𝑠 ) (6𝑎 )

𝑡 𝑘 exit  

> 𝑠𝑟
> 𝑠

≤ 𝑡 𝑘 enter  

> 𝑟𝑠
> 𝑟

− 𝛿 + 𝑀 (1 − 𝑧 𝑟𝑠 ) ∀ intersection/opposite encounters, 

(𝑟 , 𝑠 ) (6𝑏 )

𝑡 𝑘 𝑟  

> 𝑟

≤ 𝑡 𝑘 𝑠  

> 𝑠

− 𝛿 + 𝑀 𝑧 𝑟𝑠  ∀ same direction encounters, 

∀(𝑘 𝑟 , 𝑘 𝑠 ) ∈ 𝒦 𝑟𝑠  (7𝑎 )

𝑡 𝑘 𝑠  

> 𝑠

≤ 𝑡 𝑘 𝑟  

> 𝑟

− 𝛿 + 𝑀 (1 − 𝑧 𝑟𝑠 ) ∀ same direction encounters, 

∀(𝑘 𝑟 , 𝑘 𝑠 ) ∈ 𝒦 𝑟𝑠  (7𝑏 )

The objective function is the sum of completion (SOC) times across all mobile robots, since  𝑡 𝐾 𝑟  

> 𝑟

is 

the arrival time to the goal waypoint for robot  𝑟 . The solver minimizes the SOC by jointly choosing 

robot orderings  𝑧 𝑟𝑠  and event waypoint arrival times  𝑡 𝑟  . Alternatively, the objective could 

minimize the makespan (max  

> 𝑟

𝑡 𝐾 𝑟  

> 𝑟

), but we use the SOC objective to maintain linearity in the 

optimization problem. Thus, t he problem is a mixed -integer linear program , with t he objective and 

all constraints linea r, and the variables  𝑧 𝑟𝑠  required to be  0 or  1. The number of binary variable s19 

equals the number of non -boundary encounter windows, so the integer programming complexity 

grows with fleet encounters, not with path length or resolution. 

The MICP formulation above is general and accommodates three fleet coordination 

scenarios without changing the constraint structure ; only the variable s which are free or constant 

differ. In the sequential scenario , a new robot  𝑟  is dispatched while existing robots are executing 

already known trajectories. In the constraints, robot  𝑟 ’s event waypoint arrival times are decision 

variables and all other robot arrival times are constant . In the simultaneous scenario , a fleet of  𝑅 

robots are dispatched at once and the event waypoint arrival times for all robots are decision 

variables. In the unified scenario , a set of planning robots must plan around a set of robots that are 

already executing fixed trajectories. In the unified case, the planning robot event waypoint arrival 

times are decision variables, and the already planned robot arrival times are constant . Regardless 

of the scenario, the constraints in Eqs. 5-7 are constructed identically, adapting the optimization 

problem to any scenario. 

After the MICP is solved, the full trajectory for each mobile robot is recovered through 

linear interpolation of arc length between consecutive even t waypoints , achieving a piecewise 

constant velocity motion profile. Although robot controls may not directly adhere to the constant 

velocity profile (due to finite acceleration/deceleration), the time safety margin  𝛿  provide s a

collision buffer if deviation s from the constant velocity assumption are minimal .

3.4 Robustness and Scalability 

For the proposed framework to be viable in real -world settings, we address two practical 

challenges: reacting to dynamic changes in the environment and scaling efficiently to large 

numbers of mobile robots. This section details the strategies developed for each challenge. 20 

3.4.1 Dynamic Obstacles 

While the global map is assumed to be static, real -world environments contain unmapped, 

temporary obstacles such as stationary humans or parked cart s. Our framework handles these 

dynamic changes by leveraging temporary occupancy grid overlays and heatmaps. The process is 

as follows: 

1)  Detection and Local Invalidation: When a mobile robot detects a new obstac le, the shared 

social graph  𝐻  is not immediately modified . Instead, the mobile robot creates a temporary, 

local overlay in the occupancy grid representing this new obstacle. The change prevents 

temporary obstacles from immediately affecting the fleet’s shared social graph .

2)  Replanning with Existing Framework : The mobile robot replans considering the original 

occupancy grid, the social graph, and the temporary overlay. The local overlay forces the 

planner to deviate from the social graph in the obstructe d area. The cost function in Eq. 4 

naturally responds to the deviation, with the planner paying the social cost  𝜙  and penalty 

𝜀  to find a new, socially compliant detour. 

3)  Path Broadcasting with Context: The newly computed detour path is broadcast to the fleet 

but is tagged as “ temporary.” These “temporary” paths are aggregated into a separate, 

temporary set of heatmaps. The primary social graph  𝐻  is built only from non -temporary 

paths , insulating the social graph from transient behavior . Only paths that are affected by 

the obstacle should be marked as temporary. For example, paths which come within a 

specified proximity of the object. 

4)  Adaptation and Recover y: Our approach enables both long -term adaptation and recovery 

from temporary objects: 21 

• Recovery: When a temporary object is removed (as detected by the mobile robot), the 

robot clears the temporary overlay for the object. Since the temporary detour paths are 

not included in the social graph, the mobile robot reverts to the original social graph. 

• Adaptation: If an object becomes permanent, many mobile robots will generate the 

same temporary detour paths around the object. If the detour count in the temporary 

heatmap surpasses a threshold, the system can promote the temporary heatmap to the 

social heatmap while removing the edges in the social graph now blocked by the 

obstacle, permanently updating the social graph to reflect the new obstacle. 

Our strategy ensures that the system is robust to temporary obstacles without sacrificing the long -

term integrity of the learned social graph, distinguishing between temporary obstacles and 

permanent environmental changes. 

3.4.2 Distributed Computation for Scalable Trajectory Optimization 

While the MICP formulation is efficient, the process of identifying all potential conflicts 

to generate constraints can become a bottleneck. The number of pairwise collision checks grows 

quadratically (𝑂 (𝑅 2)) with the number of robots  𝑅  in the simultaneous planning case, making 

centralized constraint generation slow for large fleets . To improve scalability, the mobile robot 

fleet acts as a distributed computing system , paralleliz ing the constraint generation process. This 

section details the distributed protocols for each planning scenario . We assume that communication 

latency is negligible compared to collision checking computation time , but we explore the role of 

communication latency during experiments in Section 5. 

The distributed constraint checking strategy for each of the planning scenarios are as 

follows: 22 

• Sequential Planning Protocol : Under sequential planning, the planning robot must check 

for conflicts against  𝑅 − 1 other robots. First , the planning robot broadcasts its waypoints 

to the fleet . Each of the other  𝑅 − 1 mobile robots independently compute the collision 

constraints with its own trajectory and transmits the conflicts to the planning robot. The 

planning robot gathers the constraints and solves the MICP .

• Simultaneous Planning Protocol: Under a simultaneous plan of  𝑅  mobile robots,  𝑅 (𝑅 −1)

> 2

pairwise collision checks are distributed. E ach mobile robot broadcasts its path and uses a 

deterministic algorithm to determine which constraint checks to perform. The robots use a 

circular ordering scheme illustrated in Figure 4 , where each robot compute s constraint s for 

approximately  𝑛 = 𝑅 −1 

> 2

robot pairs . If  𝑅  is odd, every mobile robot perform s 𝑛  robot pair 

checks . I f 𝑅  is even, half of the mobile robots perform  𝑛 + 1 robot pair checks and the 

other half perform  𝑛  robot pair checks. After checking for possible collisions, each mobile 

robot broadcasts the discovered encounter windows , and each robot can locally build and 

solve the identical, ful l MICP. 

• Unified Planning Protocol: The distributed approach for the unified scenario is a

combination of the sequential and simultaneous scenarios . The currently planning robots 

are responsible for distributing collision checks using the procedure from simultaneous 

planning. Meanwhile, the already planned robots generate the sequential collision 

constraints of their own trajectory with each of the currently planning robot paths. 

Distributing the constraint generation reduces the total computational time required to formulat e

the MICP problem by leveraging the entire fleet’s computing power. 

4. SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 23 

To validate the performance and characteristics of our proposed framework, we conduct a 

series of experiments on simulated robot environments in this section and demonstrate the 

framework on hardware in Section 5 . First, we analyze the social path planner’s ability to generate 

paths t hat align with the desired social characteristics. Then, we demonstrate the utility of the social 

graph, assessing the social graph’s impact on path consistency and planning efficiency. Finally, we 

evaluate the performance and scalability of the MICP trajectory generator for multi -robot 

coordination. The experiments are conducted in the three environments shown in Figure 5 , which 

include two layouts with idealized hallway and room structure s and one environment generated by 

mapping the second floor of the Y2E2 building at Stanford University . Environments 1 and 2 are 

used entirely in simulation, while Environment 3 is used primarily for the hardware experiments 

in Section 5. The parameters used for these experiments are listed in Table 1 .

4.1 Social Planner Performance and Compliance 

We first evaluate the social planner ’s ability to generate paths that balance efficien cy with 

social compliance. To quantify the social planner’s success, we compare the planner against the 

vanilla A* (shortest path) and RRT* (sampling -based planner) algorithm s. The evaluation consists 

of 500 trials for each environment, with each trial using a random start and goal location. We 

measure three metrics: total path length (efficiency), average distance to the right -hand wall (social 

compliance), and computation time. 

The results, presented in Table 2, reveal the expected trade -offs. The social planner 

produces plans that are, on average, longer than the optimal paths found by A*. The increase in 

path length is a direct result of enforcing social rules , which often preclude taking the shortest 

possible route. In exchange for the modest increase in path length, the social planner demonstrates 

improved social compliance, maintaining a much smaller and more consistent average distance to 24 

the right -hand wall . The results also highlight the larger computation cost of the social planner ,

due to the more complex cost function. While potentially prohibitive , we show in Section 4.2 that 

the planning speed can be improved dramatically by developing and using a social graph .

Additionally, while not used in this experiment, the social cost can be precomputed for each valid 

movement, eliminating the cost of computing the social cost function during planning. 

Figure 6 provides a qualitative illustration of the different planners on Environment 1 ,

showcasing typical paths generated by each planner . The A* planner optimiz es solely for path 

distance , producing paths that are short but often moving along the left -hand side or the middle of 

hallway s. RRT* generates paths that are both sub -optimal in path leng th and social compliance, 

showing a high degree of variance due to the algorithm’s stochastic nature . In contrast , our social 

planner adheres to the social rules, traveling only along the right -hand side of the hallways while 

taking only slightly longer paths. 

4.2 Social Graph Analysis 

Next, we analyze the performance of the social graph , which is designed to lower the 

computation cost of social planning and enforce fleet -wide path consistency . First, we demonstrate 

the formation and convergence of the social graph , as depicted visually in Figure 7 for 

Environment 1 . Starting with an empty graph, we use the social planner to plan paths between 

random points, aggregating these paths into a hea tmap. As more paths are planned, distinct, 

highway -like lanes emerge, particularly along the walls, demonstrating that the graph successfully 

captures the desired social conventions and creating predictable routes that humans can easily 

anticipate .

We demonstrate the social graph under temporary environmental changes as described in 

Section 3.4.1. Figure 7 c shows the social graph’s behavior when a temporary object blocks a 25 

primary route. New paths are routed around the new obstacle, but any path that is affected is labeled 

“temporary” and is not integrated into the trusted heatmap of the primary social graph. The 

temporary heatmap ensures that transient obstacles do not perm anently degrade the learned social 

conventions once the obstacle is removed. Should the object become permanent, the temporary 

paths shown in Figure 7 c can be added to the trusted heatmap to generate an update of the social 

graph for the new geometry. 

Last , we quantify the computational benefit of planning while using the social graph. 

Throughout the social graph formation process, we record the time required to plan 100 paths 

between the same random start and goal points using the biased cost function from Eq. 4. The 

result, plotted in Figure 8 , shows that the social graph significantly reduces the social path planning 

time, decreasing the computation time to less than that of A* baseline for Environments 1 and 2 .

The heavily biased cost function constrains the modified A* search space to the social graph ’s 

established paths, significantly reducing the required number of explored nodes. Thus, the social 

graph provi des a common set of paths for mobile robots and provides improved computational 

efficiency. 

4.3 Multi -Robot Trajectory Co ordination 

We evaluate the performance and scalability of the trajectory controller subject to planned 

social paths . First, we provide a qualitative example to demonstrate the effectiveness of the 

trajectory coordination and then conduct a quantitative analysis to assess the computational 

scalability for large r numbers of mobile robots. 

4. 3.1 Collision Avoidance 26 

To validate the trajectory controller’s ability to generate collision -free trajectories, we 

design a scenario in Environment 1 where four mobile robots with various maximum speeds have 

planned paths that intersect or overlap. The trajectory controller solv es the simultaneous 

optimization problem described in Section 3.3.3, with Figure 9 showing the robots as they 

approach the intersection . The controller successfully computes arrival times for each mobile robot 

without collisions and optimizes for the total time taken by the mobile robots. Notice that the faster 

robots allow the slower gold robot to pass the intersection first to allow the slower robot to follow 

its path without slowing . Meanwhile, the two robots with the same direction encounter window 

maintain their ordering along the entire segment . Figure 9 shows the utility of the social graph, 

with planned paths only overlap ping at intersections or when moving in the same direction along 

the same path, simplifying the potential collision locations .

4.3.2 Comparison to Baseline Approaches 

We evaluate our trajectory coordination approach on Environment 1 using the MICP 

against the conflict -based search (CBS) [3] method and sequential priority planning (PP) [4] 

method. The CBS method first plans each path individually and then resolves resulting collisions 

with a higher -level search algorithm. The PP method assigns higher priority to mobile robots with 

longer path lengths and then plans each path sequentially in order of priority . We evaluate each 

method across varying numbers of mobile robots and provide a summary of the success rate, 

makespan time, and computation time of the solver. We limit each solver to 120 seconds of solve 

time and otherwise consider the attempt a failure. For CBS and PP, the map resolution is 

downsampled by a factor of 4 to reduce the computational load. The results are summarized in 

Figure 10 , averaging over 25 total trials for each method. First, notice th at our approach has a 

higher success rate than the other approaches while maintaining a shorter solve time, even as the 27 

number of mobile robots grows. The feasibility and short solve time s are a direct consequence of 

our social planner that produces paths that rarely conflict . Our MICP requires a single binary 

variable for each encounter window, keeping the number of variables small. Note that the solve 

time only includes the MICP solver time and not the social path planning time and constraint 

generation time. However, as we have shown, the social path planning time remains fast due to the 

social graph, and as we will show in Section 4.3.3 , the distributed constraint generation results in 

small constraint generation time. The MICP solver is the only centralized component of our 

system, and as shown in Figure 10 , th e MICP solve time is small even for a large number of robots ,

on the order of one second . In comparison, techniques such as CBS and PP are entirely centralized, 

resulting in large computation time as the number of robots increases. Our approach ’s runtime also 

does not increase with path resolution , in contrast to CBS and PP which require a map 

downsampling factor to obtain reasonable solve times . Last, our MICP solution produces a 

competitive makespan compared to the CBS and PP methods, even though our social paths do not 

necessarily follow the shortest path routes. The social paths following the social graph allow robots 

to pipeline along the same routes , leading to reduced potential collision points and competitive 

makespans. 

The success of our proposed trajectory coordination scheme can be attributed to the social 

paths . In Figure 11 , we show the average number of path segments that include overlap between 

agents in Environment 1, averaged over 100 random scenarios for each agent count. In the 

overlapping segment count, we omit path segments that overlap but travel in the same direction, 

since travel along the same routes are desired behaviors (mobile robots can pipeline along these 

segments and the trajectory coordinator must only solve for the relative order of the robots along 

these paths ). As shown in Figure 11 , our social planner results in fewer overlapping segments 28 

compared to A* and RRT* . With paths falling mostly along the social graph shown in Figure 7 ,

potential collision s occur primarily at intersection s, reducing the possible collision scenarios and 

simplifying the trajectory coordination problem . Meanwhile, for methods such as CBS and PP 

which rely on A*, the larger number o f potential collisions leads to increased complexity in finding 

feasible solutions. 

4.3. 3 Scalability of Trajectory Optimization 

We analyze the scalability of the trajectory controller using the distributed constraint 

generation approach. Computational performance is evaluated under the most demanding scenario ,

simultaneous planning , which requires  𝑂 (𝑅 2) collision checks to generate the optimization 

constraints for  𝑅  mobile robots. We compare the solution of a centralized constraint generation 

approach where a single robot performs all collision checks, and a distributed approach described 

in Section 3.4.2 where collision checks are distributed across the  𝑅  mobile robots. 

We simulate fleets of increasing sizes in Environment 2, with each robot assigned random 

start and goal positions. Figure 12 shows the computation time required for generating the 

constraints for MICP for both the centralized and distributed approach. As expected, the 

centralized approach computation grows quadratically since a single robot perform s all  𝑂 (𝑅 2)

collision checks. Meanwhile, the distributed approach has a linear computation time growth, 

representing the computational savings from distributing the workload. The distributed framework 

allows the generation of the convex program to scale efficiently as the size of mobile robot fleets 

increases. The MICP must still be solved centrally, but the constraint generation time can be much 

larger than the MICP solve time shown in Figure 10 b, and so the distributed approach meaningfully 

reduce s the total problem formation and solve time. 29 

5. HARDWARE EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

We perform experiments on mobile robots in an academic office building setting and 

provide the results and discussion in this section. First , the experimental setup and mobile robots 

are introduced and then t he results are provided for common scenarios: head -on hallway traffic 

and intersection crossing s. The implementation of our proposed path planner and trajectory 

coordinat or , as well as supporting videos of these experiments , are available at 

https://github.com/satomm1/path_planning .

5.1 Experimental Setup 

The experiments are performed on custom built circular differential drive mobile robots 

shown in Figure 13 a. The mobile robots contain a 2D LiDAR sensor, RGB -D camera, and have a

maximum velocity of 0.7 m/s . The onboard computer is a n NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano 8 GB 

Developer Kit. Communication among mobile robots is performed using the Data Distribution 

Service (DDS) [28] , a Wi -Fi based publish/subscribe communications protocol . Software on the 

mobile robots is facilitated using the noetic version of the robot operating system (ROS) [29] .

The experiments are performed on the second floor of the Y2E2 building at Stanford 

University, with the occupancy grid map shown as Environment 3 in Figure 5. The map resolution 

is 0.05 m per occupancy grid point, and the typical hallway width is approximately 1.5 meters ,

with a typical hallway of the building shown in Figure 13 b. The occupancy grid is produced using 

the GMapping SLAM algorithm [30] and localization is performed within the map using Adaptive 

Monte Carlo Localization [31] , both of which use a particle filter approach . Local control of the 

mobile robot is performed with a differential flatness controller. The MICP solver uses an 

embedded conic solver with a branch -and -bound procedure [32] .30 

5.2 Head -On Traffic in Hallway s and Intersection Crossings 

First, we demonstrate our approach with robots traveling in opposite directions down the 

same hallway. Our social rules result in the robots staying to the right -hand side of the hallway, 

naturally avoiding each other and bypassing the need for trajectory coordination. Consider Figure 

14 , which shows two different hallway scenarios featuring two mobile robots. In the upper case ,

the social plans lead to no collision if the mobile robot s start at the same time, with both mobile 

robots completing their trajectory in the minimal required time . However, when using an A* path ,

the paths collide along most of the length of the trajectory, and the right robot must wait until the 

left robot completes it s trajectory, resulting in a slower makespan . Meanwhile, in the lower case, 

the social planner again allows both mobile robots to complete their trajectories immediately 

without any collision. With A*, the paths intersect throughout , and without a robot aware local 

planner the trajectory coordination is infeasible. 

Next, we demonstrate the framework’s ability to negotiate at intersections . A s shown in 

Figure 15 , the mobile robots navigat e an intersection following routes determined by the social 

planner with trajectories generated by our MICP formulation. As illustrated in Figure 15 , the 

trajectory coordinator effectively manages the intersection scenario. In both examples, the 

intersection encounter window constraints dictate that only one mobile robot is allowed in the 

intersection at a time, while other robots must wait outside the intersection to provide a clear path. 

These demonstrations illustrate that our social path planning and trajectory coordination approach 

are effective on hardware, limiting the possible collision zones and successfully assigning event 

waypoint arrival times .

5. 3 Communication Latency and Distributed Computing 31 

We record communication latencies of less than 100 ms when communicating paths and 

collision constraints between mobile robots using the Wi -Fi based DDS communication system. 

Meanwhile, generating collision constraints for a single pair of robots is typically greater than 200 

ms depending on the path lengths. Thus, communication latency is small enough to provide benefit 

for even a small number of mobile robots. Table 3 provide s the average relative speedup in 

constraint generation when using a distributed approach instead of a centralized approach on our 

robot hardware. We see an improvement of at least 50% with the relative speedup increasing as 

the number of robots increases since the centralized method scales quadratically and the distributed 

method scales linearly. Because the communication latency is small, the distributed constraint 

generation approach serves as an important method for reducing the total trajectory coordination 

computation time. 

5. 4 Local Planner Considerations 

Our framework provides a global path and trajectory for multiple robots. However, due to 

localization noise, actuation error, and dynamic objects in the environment, the framework must 

be supplemented with a local (reactive) path planner. To maintain social awareness, the local 

planner should also be human -aware. To fully maintain the multi -robot advantages of our proposed 

framework, the local planner should be tightly integrated with the global planner, such that the 

robot returns to the global path as soon as possible to maintain the validity of the collision free 

trajectories. If a mobile robot becomes significantly delayed or the planned path becomes 

unreachable due to a new obstacle , our framework accommodates this scenario through the 

sequential path planning option . The delayed or blocked mobile robot can perform a sequential 

path planning optimization for its remaining path, reintegrating with the existing mobile robot 32 

trajectories. If mobile robot failure affects a subset of the fleet or the entire fleet, the mobile robots 

can perform a unified or simultaneous replan. 

6. CONCLUSION 

The integration of autonomous mobile robots into human -centric env ironments depends on 

the mobile robots’ ability to navigate safely, efficiently, and in a manner that is both socially 

co nforming and predictable . While many ex isting navigation systems address local planning and 

collision avoidance, they do not generate globally consistent and socially acceptable fleet -wide 

behavior . This paper addresses the global social path planning gap by introducing a decentralized 

framework that decouples global, socially aware path planning and multi -robot trajectory 

coordination. 

Our contribution is a multi -stage architecture that jointly orchestrates social path planning 

and multi -robot trajectory coordination. First, human social norms are embedded directly into the 

cost function of a modified A* planner, generating socially aware paths. To address the 

computational overhead and enforce fleet -wide consistency, we introduce a learned social graph .

The social graph represents a shared network of established routes, with future paths biased 

towards these routes, encourag ing predictable behavior across all agents . Social path planning 

simplifies the multi -robot trajectory coordination problem by reducing the number of potential 

collisions . We formulate trajectory coordination as a mixed -integer convex program that can be 

generated in distributed manner, improving scalability across increasing numbers of mobile robots .

Several promising directions for future research emerge from this work . A valuable 

extension is to transition from engineered social costs to learn ing behaviors directly from observed 

human motion data , allowing the mobile robots to adapt to the unique conditions of a specific 

environment. Second, while our framework provides a global trajectory , integrat ing a responsive 33 

local planner is important for deployment among dynamic objects. Future work can tightly 

integrate the global trajectory planner in this work with a human -aware local planner to improve 

close -range interactions with humans. Finally, future work can explore how to adapt the social 

graph over large time scales, allowing the social graph to evolve in response to changes in human 

traffic patterns or building layout. 

In conclusion, this work demonstrates that by enforcing social consistency and 

predictability at the global planning level, the complex problem of multi -robot collision avoidance 

is more tractable and understandable . Our decoupled approach allows for scalable path planning 

and trajectory generation for mu lt i-robot fleets , all while following human social norms . Our work 

is an important step towards creating autonomous mobile robot systems that not only share spaces 

with humans , but respect human social convention s, ultimately enabling increased uptake and safer 

coexistence with humans .

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) 

Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE -2146755. This research is also 

partially supported by the Stanford’s Center for Sustainable Development and Global 

Competitiveness (SDGC) and the Center for Advanced Urban Systems (CAUS) at Korea 

Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions 

or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily 

reflect the views of NSF, SDGC, or KAIST -CAUS. 34 

REFERENCES 

[1] P. Salvini, D. Paez -Granados, and A. Billard, “Safety concerns emerging from robots 

navigating in crowded pedestrian areas,” Int J of Soc Robotics , vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 441 –462, 

Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1007/s12369 -021 -00796 -4. 

[2] T. Kruse, A. K. Pandey, R. Alami, and A. Kirsch, “Human -aware robot navigation: A survey,” 

Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1726 –1743, Dec. 2013, doi: 

10.1016/j.robot.2013.05.007. 

[3] G. Sharon, R. Stern, A. Felner, and N. R. Sturtevant, “Conflict -based search for optimal multi -

agent pathfinding,” Artificial Intelligence , vol. 219, pp. 40 –66, Feb. 2015, doi: 

10.1016/j.artint.2014.11.006. 

[4] J. P. van den Berg and M. H. Overmars, “Prioritized motion planning for multiple robots,” in 

2005 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , Aug. 2005, pp. 

430 –435. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2005.1545306. 

[5] J. van den Berg, S. J. Guy, M. Lin, and D. Manocha, “Reciprocal n -body collision avoidance,” 

in Robotics Research , Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2011, pp. 3 –19. doi: 10.1007/978 -3-642 -

19457 -3_1. 

[6] S. Saunderson and G. Nejat, “How robots influence humans: a survey of nonverbal 

communication in social human –robot interaction,” Int J of Soc Robotics , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 

575 –608, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1007/s12369 -019 -00523 -0. 

[7] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the heuristic determination of 

minimum cost paths,” IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics , vol. 4, no. 2, 

pp. 100 –107, Jul. 1968, doi: 10.1109/TSSC.1968.300136. 

[8] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Sampling -based algorithms for optimal motion planning,” The 

International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 846 –894, Jun. 2011, doi: 

10.1177/0278364911406761. 

[9] L. E. Kavraki, P. Svestka, J. -C. Latombe, and M. H. Overmars, “Probabilistic roadmaps for 

path planning in high -dimensional configuration spaces,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics and 

Automation , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 566 –580, Aug. 1996, doi: 10.1109/70.508439. 

[10] J. Alonso -Mora, A. Breitenmoser, M. Rufli, P. Beardsley, and R. Siegwart, “Optimal 

reciprocal collision avoidance for multiple non -holonomic robots,” in Distributed 

Autonomous Robotic Systems: The 10th International Symposium , Berlin, Heidelberg: 

Springer, 2013, pp. 203 –216. doi: 10.1007/978 -3-642 -32723 -0_15. 

[11] E. T. Hall et al. , “Proxemics,” Current Anthropology , vol. 9, no. 2/3, pp. 83 –108, Apr. 1968, 

doi: 10.1086/200975. 

[12] D. Helbing and P. Molnár, “Social force model for pedestrian dynamics,” Phys. Rev. E , vol. 

51, no. 5, pp. 4282 –4286, May 1995, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.51.4282. 

[13] P. Patompak, S. Jeong, N. Y. Chong, and I. Nilkhamhang, “Mobile robot navigation for 

human -robot social interaction,” in 2016 16th International Conference on Control, 

Automation and Systems (ICCAS) , Oct. 2016, pp. 1298 –1303. doi: 

10.1109/ICCAS.2016.7832481. 

[14] R. C. Luo and C. Huang, “Human -aware motion planning based on search and sampling 

approach,” in 2016 IEEE Workshop on Advanced Robotics and its Social Impacts (ARSO) ,

Jul. 2016, pp. 226 –231. doi: 10.1109/ARSO.2016.7736286. 

[15] R. Kirby, R. Simmons, and J. Forlizzi, “COMPANION: a constraint -optimizing method for 

person -acceptable navigation,” in RO -MAN 2009 - The 18th IEEE International Symposium 35 

on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , Sep. 2009, pp. 607 –612. doi: 

10.1109/ROMAN.2009.5326271. 

[16] A. Ravankar, A. A. Ravankar, Y. Hoshino, M. Watanabe, and Y. Kobayashi, “Safe mobile 

robot navigation in human -centered environments using a heat map -based path planner,” Artif 

Life Robotics , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 264 –272, May 2020, doi: 10.1007/s10015 -020 -00591 -w. 

[17] W. Yan, L. He, H. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Li, and Y. Du, “PF -TEB: timed elastic band -based human -

aware robot navigation framework in crowded environments,” IEEE Robotics and 

Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 12157 –12164, Nov. 2025, doi: 

10.1109/LRA.2025.3620621. 

[18] G. Pérez, N. Zapata -Cornejo, P. Bustos, and P. Núñez, “Social elastic band with prediction 

and anticipation: enhancing real -time path trajectory optimization for socially aware robot 

navigation,” Int J of Soc Robotics , vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 2041 –2063, Oct. 2025, doi: 

10.1007/s12369 -024 -01135 -z. 

[19] P. Teja Singamaneni, A. Favier, and R. Alami, “Human -aware navigation planner for diverse 

human -robot interaction contexts,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 

Robots and Systems (IROS) , Sep. 2021, pp. 5817 –5824. doi: 

10.1109/IROS51168.2021.9636613. 

[20] B. Kim and J. Pineau, “Socially adaptive path planning in human environments using inverse 

reinforcement learning,” Int J of Soc Robotics , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 51 –66, Jan. 2016, doi: 

10.1007/s12369 -015 -0310 -2. 

[21] Y. F. Chen, M. Everett, M. Liu, and J. P. How, “Socially aware motion planning with deep 

reinforcement learning,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots 

and Systems (IROS) , Sep. 2017, pp. 1343 –1350. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2017.8202312. 

[22] C. Chen, Y. Liu, S. Kreiss, and A. Alahi, “Crowd -robot interaction: crowd -aware robot 

navigation with attention -based deep reinforcement learning,” in 2019 International 

Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , May 2019, pp. 6015 –6022. doi: 

10.1109/ICRA.2019.8794134. 

[23] I. K. Kabir and M. F. Mysorewala, “Socially aware navigation for mobile robots: a survey on 

deep reinforcement learning approaches,” Appl Intell , vol. 56, no. 1, p. 38, Jan. 2026, doi: 

10.1007/s10489 -025 -06982 -5. 

[24] H. Durrant -Whyte and T. Bailey, “Simultaneous localization and mapping: part I,” IEEE 

Robotics & Automation Magazine , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 99 –110, Jun. 2006, doi: 

10.1109/MRA.2006.1638022. 

[25] Lozano -Perez, “Spatial planning: a configuration space approach,” IEEE Transactions on 

Computers , vol. C –32, no. 2, pp. 108 –120, Feb. 1983, doi: 10.1109/TC.1983.1676196. 

[26] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization . Cambridge University Press, 2004. 

[27] G. L. Nemhauser and L. A. Wolsey, Integer and combinatorial optimization . New York ; 

Chichester : Wiley, 1999. doi: 10.1002/9781118627372. 

[28] G. Pardo -Castellote, “OMG Data -Distribution Service: architectural overview,” in 23rd 

International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, 2003 , May 2003, 

pp. 200 –206. doi: 10.1109/ICDCSW.2003.1203555. 

[29] M. Quigley et al. , “ROS: an open -source Robot Operating System,” in Proc. of the IEEE Intl. 

Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , Kobe, Japan, May 2009. 

[30] G. Grisetti, C. Stachniss, and W. Burgard, “Improved techniques for grid mapping with rao -

blackwellized particle filters,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 34 –46, Feb. 

2007, doi: 10.1109/TRO.2006.889486. 36 

[31] S. Thrun 1967 -, W. Burgard, and D. Fox, Probabilistic robotics . Massachusetts, United 

States: Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 2005. 

[32] A. Domahidi, E. Chu, and S. Boyd, “ECOS: An SOCP solver for embedded systems,” in 2013 

European Control Conference (ECC) , Jul. 2013, pp. 3071 –3076. doi: 

10.23919/ECC.2013.6669541. 37 

FIGURES 

Figure 1: Many p ath plann ers optimize for the shortest route . In this paper, we aim for a balance 

between social comp liance and shortest path routes .

Figure 2. Overview of the decoupled navigation framework. (a) Social A* planner generates a

socially compliant geometric path. (b) Multiple paths are aggregated to form a shared social graph. 

(c) A convex optimization solver coordinates the trajector ies of mobile robots to prevent collisions. 

Figure 3: The event waypoints and encounter windows used for generating constraints during 

trajectory coordination. 38 

Figure 4: Distributed collision checking assignments for robots 1 and 5 in the case of (a) an odd 

number of robots and (b) an even number of robots. 

Figure 5: The test environments for the path planner and trajectory controller. Environments 1 and 

2 are artificially created environments, while Environment 3 is a real map from the second floor 

of the Y2E2 building at Stanford University. 

Figure 6: Examples of paths planned by A* , RRT*, and the social planner on Environment 1. 39 

Figure 7: The social graph of Environment 1 after (a) 150 planned paths , (b) 250 planned paths ,

and (c) with temporary path s due to a temporary obstacle. 

Figure 8: The relative social path planning time when using the modified cost function with the 

social graph, as compared to vanilla A* .40 

Figure 9: An example of optimized trajectories under simultaneous planning for four mobile 

robots. The other mobile robots allow the slowest robot (gold robot) to pass through the 

intersection first. The blue and purple robots maintain a consistent ordering throughout their entire 

shared path segment. 

Figure 10 : The (a) solver success rate, (b) solver runtime, and (c) solution makespan for our 

MICP approach as compared to the CBS and PP methods as evaluated on Environment 1. 41 

Figure 11 : Comparison of overlapping path segments when using the different path solvers. 

Overlapping segments are excluded when they travel in the same direction since social behavior 

encourages movement in the same lanes .

Figure 12 : Constraint generation computation time when using a distributed and centralized 

strategy. 

Figure 13 : The mobile robots and typical building hallway used for the hardware experiments. 42 

Figure 14 : Comparison of two mobile robots approaching each other head on in a hallway using 

the (a) A* planner and (b) social planner. The social planner leads to no conflict, resulting in shorter 

robot navigation times. 

Figure 15 : Demonstration of (a) two and (b) three mobile robots negotiating at an intersection 

using the social path planner and trajectory coordination. 43 

TABLES 

Table 1: The parameters selected for the experiments. 

Parameter  Value 

𝑤 right  1.0

𝑤 const  2.0

𝑤 buf  5.0

𝑑 buf  4.0 m

𝜀  0.01 

𝑉 max  0.7 m/s 

𝛿  1 s

Table 2: Evaluation of the social planner as compared to baseline planners A* and RRT* . Each 

comparison is made across 500 common random start and end locations for each method. 

Evaluation Metric 

Algorithm 

Mean Path 

Length (m) 

Mean Right 

Distance (m) 

Mean Computation 

Time (sec) 

Environment 1 

A*  64 .3 ± 33 .33  8.31 ± 8.49  0.348 ± 0.697 

RRT*  68 .1 ± 37 .0 27 .3 ± 38 .1 0.764 ± 1.126 

Social Planner  74 .0 ± 37 .4 2.64 ± 5.95  20 .7 ± 18 .0

Environment 2 

A*  77 .5 ± 36 .6 12 .6 ± 14 .5 6.40 ± 8.39 

RRT*  89 .4 ± 48 .2 24 .7 ± 26 .2 31 .0 ± 35 .7

Social Planner  94 .1 ± 44 .4 9.69 ± 15 .2 56 .8 ± 51 .7

Environment 3 

A*  46 .6 ± 26 .0 2.43 ± 2.21  3.78 ± 5.19 

RRT*  49 .7 ± 28 .1 10 .1 ± 20 .0 6.36 ± 12 .18 

Social Planner  52 .9 ± 29 .8 1.17 ± 1.12  30 .6 ± 22 .6

Table 3: Average improvement in the c onstraint generation time on robot hardware when using 

the distributed approach as compared to the centralized approach. 

Number of Robots  Mean  Standard 

Deviation 

3 55.1%  13.2% 

4 67.2 % 6.9 %

5 78. 4% 1. 8%44 

ALGORITHMS 

Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for the A* path finding algorithm .

1. initialize priority queue open_set and empty set closed_set 

2. add x_init to open_set , initialize g[x_init] := 0

3. while open_set is not empty: 

4. x_current := x with smallest priority, p, from open_set 

5. if x_current = x_goal → return 

6. move x_current from open_set to closed_set 

7. for each x_neigh in neighborhood of x_current :

8. if x_neigh in closed_set → continue 

9. new_g := g[x_current] + c[x_current, x_neigh] 

10 . add x_neigh to open_set with priority new_g + h[x_neigh]