Title: Trajectory Optimization in Single and Dual-UAV Bearing-Only Target Localization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.09188v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 01:54:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Trajectory Optimization in Single and Dual-UAV Bearing-Only Target Localization 

Zhijian Xiao a,b , Huayu Huang a,b , Bin Li a,b,1 , Yang Shang a,b,1 , Banglei Guan a,b 

> aCollege of Aerospace Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
> bHunan Key Laboratory of Image Measurement and Visual Navigation, Changsha 410073, China

Abstract 

Bearing-only target localization is a fundamental problem in optical measurement and finds extensive applications in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) technology. E ff ective trajectory planning establishes favorable observation geometries, thereby enhancing the target localization accuracy of bearing-only UAV systems. This paper proposes an trajectory optimization method for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in bearing-only target localization scenarios. By leveraging the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM), the proposed approach dynamically integrates the geometric configuration and vehicle maneuverability into the optimization framework. Specifically, we introduce a spectrally-weighted FIM objective function that provides better gradient dynamics near degenerate configurations, enabling the planner to rapidly escape from poor observation conditions. For dual-UAV scenarios, an intersection angle sine term is introduced to optimize triangulation geometry by improving the sight-line intersection angle, thereby preventing trajectory aggregation. Furthermore, we propose an improved Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm with motion model constraints and particle normalization to ensure the physical feasibility of the trajectory and enhance the compatibility with the objective functions. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed method reduces the median localization error by 99.21% compared to conventional FIM-based approaches in single-UAV scenarios, and achieves a 69.70% improvement for dual-UAV configurations, exhibits superior performance in long-duration bearing-only target localization of maneuverability targets at extended ranges. 

Keywords: Fisher Information Matrix, Trajectory Optimization, Bearing-Only Target Localization, Particle Swarm Optimization 

1. Introduction 

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have widely become in-dispensable tools in civilian and military applications, including infrastructure inspection, precision agriculture, search and res-cue operations, and surveillance missions [ 1 , 2]. The ability of UAVs to access areas that are di ffi cult to reach and operate in hazardous environments has driven their rapid adoption in recent years. Central to the e ff ectiveness of these applications is the capability to accurately localize and track targets of in-terest in real-time, which forms the foundation for autonomous decision-making and mission execution [3, 4]. Target localization techniques for UAVs can be categorized based on the type of measurements employed. While range-based methods using GPS, LiDAR, or ultrasonic sensors pro-vide direct distance information, bearing-only localization using monocular cameras has gained significant attention due to its low cost, light weight, and minimal payload requirements [ 5, 6, 7]. In most cases, the direction of the targets relative to the UAV is measured through visual sensors, and the position of the targets is estimated through geometric triangulation over time [8]. The development of bearing-only localization has been driven by advances in both theoretical understanding and practical al-gorithms. Early work established the fundamental observability  

> ∗Corresponding author.
> E-mail address: libin19a@nudt.edu.cn; shangyang1977@nudt.edu.cn.

conditions for bearing-only tracking, demonstrating that the ob-server must execute specific maneuvers to guarantee that the target state is recoverable from angle measurements alone [ 9, 10 ]. Subsequent research introduced the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) and Cramér-Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) as theoretical tools for quantifying localization accuracy and optimizing sensor placement [ 11 , 12 ]. These frameworks revealed that localization performance is critically dependent on the relative geometry between observers and targets that means poor viewing angles can lead to unbounded estimation uncertainty even with high-precision sensors [13, 14]. Recent advances have significantly expanded the capabilities of bearing-only localization systems. Li et al. [15] proposed an observability-enhanced helical guidance law that drives UAVs along three-dimensional spiral trajectories, exploiting the ad-ditional degree of freedom in altitude to improve observabil-ity. Peng et al. [ 16 ] developed trajectory optimization methods using control barrier functions to actively enhance observabil-ity while accounting for sensor bias calibration. Meanwhile, learning-based approaches have emerged as promising alterna-tives: Fu et al. [ 17 ] introduced Gaussian process learning for bearing-only target tracking, providing probabilistic bounds on prediction errors. Su et al. [ 18 ] developed a real-time remote sensing framework for uneven terrain using monocular bearing-only micro UAVs, achieving 3.79 m RMSE in field experiments. These developments collectively demonstrate the rich potential of bearing-only methods for practical UAV applications. 

> arXiv:2606.09188v1 [cs.RO] 8 Jun 2026

Despite these advances, a fundamental limitation persists: most existing approaches treat the UAV as a passive observer, neglecting its inherent mobility as a controllable degree of free-dom for improving localization performance. This observation motivates the paradigm of active perception, where the sensing platform dynamically adjusts its motion to maximize informa-tion acquisition [ 19 ]. In contrast to passive data collection with pre-defined trajectories, active perception tightly couples sens-ing and decision-making, enabling the platform to respond to real-time observations and optimize the quality of gathered in-formation by controlling the motion of the platform [20, 21]. The benefits of active perception for bearing-only localization are substantial. By intelligently planning trajectories that maxi-mize observability, UAVs can achieve significantly higher local-ization accuracy with fewer measurements compared to passive approaches [ 22 , 23 ]. Popovi´ c et al. [ 24 ] demonstrated that infor-mative path planning using the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) can reduce map entropy by 45% compared to coverage-based planners. Rúckin et al. [ 25 ] showed that deep reinforcement learning for adaptive informative path planning achieves 8–10 × speedup over evolutionary methods while maintaining superior information gathering performance. Recent work by Mudrik et al. [ 26 ] further demonstrated that coordinated teams of fixed-field-of-view UAVs can match or surpass the localization accuracy of single gimballed systems while substantially lowering system complexity and cost. These results highlight the transformative potential of leveraging UAV mobility for active observation. However, existing active perception approaches for bearing-only localization face several challenges. First, the conven-tional FIM-based optimization typically maximizes the determi-nant [ 27 ]. The D-optimality gradient vanishes near degenerate geometries, causing the optimizer to become trapped in singu-lar configurations. Second, multi-UAV coordination strategies often assume static geometric configurations or decouple trajec-tory planning from target dynamics [ 28 ]. Third, conventional trajectory optimization methods use the direction angle as the optimization vector, resulting in the generation of unreasonable waypoints. [ 29 , 30 ]. Recent advances in self-supervised learning for trajectory planning [ 31 ] and particle filter-guided neural net-works for multi-target tracking [ 32 ] o ff er promising directions. However, their methods have not been fully integrated into the frameworks of active perception. To address these limitations, this paper presents an trajectory optimization framework for UAV bearing-only target localiza-tion as shown in Fig. 1. Our main contributions are threefold: 

• We propose a spectrally-weighted FIM objective function that reshapes the optimization landscape near degenerate configurations. By logarithmically aggregating FIM eigen-values, the objective function generates diverging gradients that enables the optimizer to escape local optima more easily, thereby generating optimal trajectories. 

• We extend this formulation by introducing an intersection angle sine objective function for dual-UAV scenarios that optimizes triangulation geometry by optimizing the sight-line intersection angle, thereby preventing trajectory aggre-gation and enhancing cross-bearing information diversity. 

• We develop a motion-constrained PSO algorithm with parti-cle normalization that embeds platform motion constraints into the particle generation iteration process and uses par-ticle diversity features to automatically adjust the weights of sub-functions. This ensures the physical feasibility of the trajectory without manual tuning of objective weights, enhancing compatibility with the objective functions. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work on active perception and informative path planning for UAV-based localization. Section 3 presents the theoretical foundation of our approach, including the spectrally-weighted FIM formulation, the intersection angle sine objec-tive for dual-UAV coordination, and our optimization algorithm framework. Section 4 presents simulation results validating the eff ectiveness of the proposed method. Section 5 discusses the obtained results, analyzes the strong and weak points of our method, and outlines future research directions. Section 6 makes a conclusion for this paper. 

2. Related Work 

Active perception refers to the paradigm where a sensing platform dynamically adjusts its state or motion to maximize the information content of acquired measurements [ 19 ]. Unlike passive perception where sensor configuration is fixed or fol-lows pre-defined patterns, active perception treats sensing and decision-making as coupled processes that mutually inform each other. This concept has its roots in active vision research, where camera parameters such as gaze direction, focus, and aperture are controlled to facilitate visual tasks [ 20 , 21 ]. In the context of UAV-based localization, active perception manifests as trajectory optimization that maximizes information-theoretic objectives while respecting platform dynamics and mission constraints. The e ff ectiveness of active perception stems from its ability to exploit the fundamental relationship between sensor geome-try and estimation uncertainty. For bearing-only measurements, the Fisher Information Matrix provides a theoretical charac-terization of how observer-target geometry a ff ects localization accuracy [ 11 , 12 ]. By optimizing trajectories to maximize in-formation content, active perception methods can achieve the same estimation accuracy with significantly fewer measurements compared to passive approaches [ 22 , 23 ]. This e ffi ciency is par-ticularly valuable for UAV operations where battery life and mission duration are constrained. Early work in active perception for target localization focused on establishing observability conditions and developing guid-ance laws that enhance estimation performance. Nardone and Aidala [ 9 ] derived fundamental observability criteria for bearing-only tracking, demonstrating that observer acceleration must satisfy specific conditions to guarantee target state recoverabil-ity. Aidala et al. [ 10 ] introduced the Fisher Information Matrix for quantifying observability in bearing-only systems, establish-ing optimal sensor-target geometries that maximize information 2Figure 1: The flow diagram of the proposed method. 

content. These theoretical foundations laid the groundwork for subsequent trajectory optimization approaches. The framework of Informative Path Planning (IPP) formalizes active perception as an optimization problem where trajecto-ries are selected to maximize information-theoretic objectives subject to platform constraints [ 24 , 25 ]. Within this framework, existing approaches can be broadly classified into two categories: sampling-based and optimization-based methods. Sampling-based algorithms, such as those proposed by Hollinger et al. [ 22 ], balance exploration and exploitation in unknown environments. Choudhury et al. [ 23 ] combined Monte Carlo Tree Search with cost-benefit rollouts to improve sampling e ffi ciency in large action spaces. These methods demonstrated that adaptive re-planning based on accumulated information significantly out-performs pre-computed coverage patterns. Optimization-based approaches directly maximize information objectives through continuous trajectory refinement. Popovi´ c et al. [ 24 ] employed the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) to optimize measurement positions for UAV-based active classification, achieving substantial reductions in map entropy compared to coverage planners. Hitz et al. [ 33 ] extended this approach to persistent monitoring applications, demonstrating continuous refinement of informative trajectories over extended mission durations. Recent years have witnessed growing interest in learning-based methods for active perception. Rúckin et al. [ 25 ] pro-posed deep reinforcement learning for adaptive informative path planning, training a convolutional neural network to predict informative actions from environmental observations. Their approach achieved 8–10 × speedup over CMA-ES while main-taining superior uncertainty reduction performance. Vashisth et al. [ 34 ] extended this framework with dynamic graph networks for multi-UAV coordination, enabling scalable adaptive planning through learned communication protocols. Jiang et al. [ 31 ] in-troduced a self-supervised learning approach with di ff erentiable optimization for UAV trajectory planning, achieving 31.33% improvement in position tracking error and 49.37% reduction in control e ff ort. These learning-based methods o ff er promising computational e ffi ciency but require extensive o ffl ine training and may struggle with generalization to unseen environments. Several approaches specifically address the challenges of bearing-only localization through active perception. He et al. [ 8] developed trajectory optimization methods that maxi-mize bearing-based observability metrics, revealing that circu-lar motion around the target provides optimal observability for stationary targets. Li et al. [ 15 ] extended this analysis to three-dimensional scenarios, proposing helical guidance laws that exploit altitude variation to enhance observability. Recent work by Zhou et al. [ 35 ] proposed distributed fixed-time estimators for multi-UAV bearing-only target tracking, enabling complete state estimation within preset time bounds. These methods demon-strate the importance of tailoring active perception strategies to the specific characteristics of bearing measurements. Multi-UAV active perception introduces additional challenges related to coordination and information fusion. Doostmoham-madian et al. [ 28 ] developed distributed estimation approaches for tracking mobile targets via UAV formations, incorporating observability analysis into the control design. Dai et al. [ 36 ]addressed asynchronous multi-target tracking through collabora-tive trajectory optimization, demonstrating the benefits of tem-poral coordination in multi-platform scenarios. Wang et al. [ 37 ]proposed energy-e ffi cient cooperative localization by measure-ment scheduling, demonstrating that optimized fusion strate-gies can significantly reduce communication costs in large-scale swarms. However, these formation-based and scheduling-centric approaches typically decouple geometric configuration optimiza-3tion from trajectory planning, limiting their e ff ectiveness when tracking maneuvering targets. The challenge of dynamically optimizing geometric configuration while accounting for target motion and platform constraints remains an open problem. In contrast to existing approaches, this work addresses the limitations of current active perception methods for bearing-only localization through three key innovations. First, our spectrally-weighted FIM formulation explicitly promotes robust gradi-ent dynamics near degenerate configurations, overcoming the vanishing-gradient issue of conventional D-optimality criteria. Second, the intersection angle sine objective function integrates geometric configuration planning with trajectory optimization in a unified framework. Third, the motion-constrained PSO with particle normalization ensures the physical feasibility of the tra-jectory, and enhances compatibility with the objective functions. These contributions collectively advance the state-of-the-art in active perception for UAV-based bearing-only localization. 

3. Methods 

In this section, we establish the objective functions for UAV trajectory planning and propose a new algorithmic framework based on PSO algorithm. Section 3.1 introduces the conven-tional FIM objective function based on the D-optimality crite-rion and derives its functional expression. Section 3.2 presents the spectrally-weighted FIM objective function and analyzes its gradient dynamics near degenerate configurations. Section 3.3 introduces the intersection angle objective for dual-UAV coor-dination and establishes its equivalence with the GDOP. Sec-tion 3.4 presents the optimization algorithm framework for the UAV trajectory planning problem. 

3.1. Fundamentals of Fisher Information Matrix 

The FIM is a fundamental concept in statistics and information theory, quantifying the sensitivity of probability distributions to parameter variations and serving as a core tool for measuring parameter estimation uncertainty. For a parameterized probabil-ity distribution p(z|θ), where z represents the state vector and 

θ represents the parameter vector, the FIM is defined based on second-order derivatives of the log-likelihood function. The general expectation-based definition is [J]i j = E

" ∂ ln( p(z|θ)) 

∂θ i

· ∂ ln( p(z|θ)) 

∂θ j

#

, (1) where [ J]i j denotes the element in the i-th row and j-th column of the FIM, and ∂ ln p 

> ∂θ i

represents the partial derivative of the log-likelihood function with respect to the i-th parameter. Diagonal elements of FIM represent the information content for corresponding parameters. Generally, larger diagonal ele-ments indicate stronger sensitivity of the probability distribution to parameter variations, signifying greater parameter importance. According to Cramér-Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) theory, for an unbiased estimator ˆ θ, the covariance matrix satisfies cov(ˆ θ) ≥ J−1. (2) Eq. (2) establishes that the inverse of the FIM constitutes the lower bound for the parameter estimation error covariance ma-trix. When the observation angle is treated as the observation parameter θ, the target position as the state vector z, and the tri-angulation equation as the probability distribution function p(·)in Eq. 1, the inverse of FIM represents the lower bound of the achievable measurement accuracy. Consequently, researchers often use FIM to assess the impact of observations on estimates. To derive FIM for UAV observations, we simplify the motion of target over a short time interval to uniform acceleration. The state equation for the target is expressed as: 

u(k + 1) = Φu(k) + w, (3) 

u(k) = x(k), y(k), z(k), ˙x(k), ˙y(k), ˙z(k), ¨x(k), ¨y(k), ¨z(k)T , (4) 

Φ =



I3 tI3

t2

2 I3

0 I3 tI3

0 0 I3



, (5) where Φ denotes the state transition matrix, u(k) denotes the state vector of the target at the k-th time, w denotes the system process noise, [ x(k), y(k), z(k)] T denotes the position of the target at the k-th time, and t denotes the sampling time. The observation equation relating the target state to the mea-sured bearings is: 

h(k) =

"α(k)

β(k)

#

=



arctan  y(k)−y0

> x(k)−x0



arctan z(k)−z0

√(x(k)−x0)2+(y(k)−y0)2

! + η,

(6) where [ x0, y0, z0]T denotes the position of the observer at present, [α(k), β (k)] T denotes the azimuth and elevation, and η denotes the observation noise. The FIM matrix for the target observation angle can be calcu-lated using the following formula: 

J(k) = (Φ−1)T J(k − 1) Φ−1 + HT (k)R−1H(k), (7) 

H(k) = ∂h

∂u ˆu(k|k−1) 

=



− sin α

rxy 

cos α

rxy 

0 01×6

− cos α sin β

r − sin α sin β

r

cos β

r 01×6



> ˆu(k|k−1)

,

(8) where ˆu(k|k − 1) represents the predicted state at the k-th time, and r and rxy denote the distance of the predicted position of the target relative to the observation platform and its projection onto the horizontal plane. Using Eq. (7) , we can obtain the FIM of the observer’s obser-vation of the target at the next time step. As shown in Eq. (2) ,to reduce the observation error, we need to increase the observa-tion FIM. According to the D-optimization criterion, the most common form of FIM quantifier is the determinant form: 

fdopt = det( J). (9) 43.2. Spectrally-Weighted FIM Objective Function 

The conventional D-optimality criterion maximizes the deter-minant of the FIM, which geometrically corresponds to minimiz-ing the volume of the uncertainty ellipsoid. In online trajectory optimization, however, the direct use of the determinant presents practical di ffi culties when the FIM approaches rank deficiency— a situation that arises whenever multiple sight lines become collinear or nearly collinear. This motivates the adoption of a spectrally-weighted formulation that preserves the fundamental optimality structure while introducing favorable gradient dynam-ics near such degenerate configurations. The spectrally-weighted objective function is formulated as the logarithmic aggregation of FIM eigenvalues: 

fspec (u) =

> n

X

> i=1

ln  λi(J(u)) , (10) where λi(J(u)) denotes the i-th eigenvalue of the FIM J parame-terized by the platform motion parameters u. Recalling that the determinant of a matrix equals the product of its eigenvalues, this objective function can be rewritten compactly as: 

fspec (u) = ln  det( J(u))  = ln   fdopt (u), (11) Because the natural logarithm is a strictly monotone increas-ing function on (0 , +∞), the ordering of objective function values is preserved under this transformation. Consequently, any pa-rameter vector u that maximizes fdopt also maximizes fspec , and vice versa. The two objective functions therefore share identical local and global maxima, as well as identical stationary-point structure. The spectrally-weighted formulation does not alter the fundamental optimality properties of the FIM-based trajectory planning problem; rather, its practical advantages stem from the gradient dynamics induced by the logarithmic transformation, which we examine next. In bearing-only localization, a degenerate (or singular) configuration occurs whenever multiple sight lines become collinear or nearly collinear. Under such configurations, the FIM loses full rank, its determinant tends to zero, and the cor-responding Cramér-Rao lower bound diverges, rendering the target state practically unobservable. Both D-optimality and the spectrally-weighted objective function are maximized at the same non-degenerate geometry. The critical di ff erence lies in how their gradients behave when the platform trajectory ap-proaches such degenerate situation. To see this, di ff erentiate Eq. (11) with respect to the motion parameters using the chain rule: 

∇ fspec (u) = 1det( J(u)) ∇ fdopt (u). (12) Taking norms on both sides yields the gradient magnitude ratio as the following: 

∥∇ fspec (u)∥∥∇ fdopt (u)∥ = 1det( J(u)) . (13) Equation (13) reveals a fundamental behavioral di ff erence. Near a degenerate configuration, det (J) → 0+, so the right-hand side diverges to +∞. In other words, the spectrally-weighted objective function generates a gradient whose magnitude scales inversely with the determinant of the FIM. As the observation geometry approaches singularity, this gradient grows without bound, producing a strong repulsive force that pushes the op-timization away from the degenerate locus. By contrast, the D-optimality gradient ∇ fdopt remains bounded (in fact, it tends linearly to zero as the configuration approaches degeneracy), off ering no comparable escape mechanism. To make this concrete, consider the FIM of a dual-UAV sys-tem as a function of the intersection angle θ between two sight lines. When the UAVs are positioned such that θ → 0 (collinear sight lines), the FIM determinant behaves asymptotically as det (J) ∼ Cθ2 for some positive constant C determined by the range and measurement noise variance. Substituting this into Eq. (13) gives: 

∥∇ fspec ∥∥∇ fdopt ∥ ∼ 1

Cθ2 → +∞ as θ → 0. (14) The spectrally-weighted gradient therefore diverges as 1 /θ 2

near collinearity, whereas the D-optimality gradient vanishes as 

θ. This disparity is not a matter of numerical conditioning; it is an intrinsic property of the logarithmic transformation. The degeneracy-avoidance property translates directly into three operational benefits for online UAV trajectory planning. 

(1) Automatic observability safeguarding. During trajectory optimization, if a candidate motion direction would cause the UAV’s sight line to align with a previously recorded bearing, the FIM approaches rank deficiency and det (J) shrinks. Under D-optimality, the resulting gradient would be too weak to steer the optimizer away from this hazardous direction. The spectrally-weighted objective function, by virtue of Eq. (13) , generates an increasingly strong counter-gradient that repels the planned trajectory from collinear geometries. This objective function acts as an implicit observability safeguard without requiring explicit enforcement of minimum bearing-separation angles or hard constraints on angular diversity. 

(2) Robust initialization. In practice, the UAV may begin its mission with a suboptimal initial trajectory—for example, a straight-line approach that keeps the target bearing nearly constant. Such initial segments are close to degenerate, so the D-optimality objective function contributes negligible gradient information, e ff ectively freezing the optimization in its early iterations. Because the spectrally-weighted gradient scales in-versely with det (J), it maintains substantial magnitude precisely in these near-degenerate regions, allowing the planner to correct poor initial geometries rapidly rather than waiting for the UAV to drift into a more favorable configuration by chance. 

(3) Stabilized multi-objective function interactions. When the FIM term is combined with multi-UAV coordination objec-tive functions (addressed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4), the dynamic range of the D-optimality objective function becomes a practical concern. Near-degenerate flight segments can drive det (J) down to 10 −6 or lower, whereas favorable geometries may yield values of 10 4 or higher. Spanning ten orders of magnitude within a single sub-objective function destabilizes the relative weighting 5among competing terms. The logarithmic transformation com-presses this range into a moderate interval (roughly −14 to +9 in natural-log units), ensuring that the FIM term contributes stable gradient information across the entire planning horizon without swamping or being swamped by other sub-objective functions. It is worth emphasizing that the advantages described above do not arise from any di ff erence in the global optima of the two formulations. As established by Eq. (11) , the spectrally-weighted and D-optimality objective functions share the same optimal geometry. The benefits are instead dynamical in na-ture: the logarithmic transformation reshapes the optimization landscape near degenerate boundaries, providing stronger repul-sive forces and more stable multi-objective function interactions during the finite-iteration trajectory optimization process. 

3.3. Intersection Angle Objective Function Extended for Dual-UAV Configuration 

When multiple observation platforms are deployed, the ge-ometric configuration between the UAVs fundamentally deter-mines the triangulation accuracy. For a dual-UAV bearing-only system, the critical geometric parameter is the intersection an-gle θ between the two sight lines at the target location. Intuitively, when the two UAVs view the target from orthogonal directions, the bearing measurements provide complementary information along independent axes, yielding the most reliable position es-timate. Conversely, when the sight lines are nearly parallel (θ → 0), the two measurements become redundant, the triangu-lation geometry collapses, and the target position uncertainty grows without bound. This angular dependence is therefore central to the design of a multi-UAV objective function. 

> Figure 2: Definition of intersection angle in dual-UAV scenario.

Consider two observation platforms at positions s1, s2 ∈ R3

measuring bearing vectors to a target at p ∈ R3. Let a = s2 − p

and b = s1 − p denote the relative position vectors from the target to UAV 2 and UAV 1, respectively. Under equal measurement noise variance σ2 for both azimuth and elevation angles, the bearing measurement model yields a Fisher information contri-bution from each platform that takes the form of a projection matrix orthogonal to the corresponding sight line. Specifically, the FIM contribution from a single platform with sight line v is proportional to P⊥ 

> v

= I3 − vv ⊤/∥v∥2, which projects onto the plane perpendicular to the line of sight. The total FIM for target position estimation is the sum of contributions from both UAVs as the following: 

Jpos = 1

σ2

P⊥ 

> a

+ P⊥

> b

 . (15) This additive structure reveals that the total information de-pends on the relative orientation of the two sight lines. When the sight lines are orthogonal, the two projection matrices span complementary subspaces, and the FIM accumulates maximal directional diversity. When the sight lines are parallel, the pro-jection matrices coincide, and the total information degenerates to that of a single observation. To quantify this angular dependence, assume for simplicity that both UAVs are at the same distance d from the target, so 

∥a∥ = ∥b∥ = d. Select a coordinate frame in which the two sight lines are symmetrically disposed about the z-axis with intersection angle θ:

a =



0

d sin( θ/ 2) 

d cos( θ/ 2) 

 , b =



0

−d sin( θ/ 2) 

d cos( θ/ 2) 

 . (16) Substituting these into the FIM expression and carrying out the matrix algebra, the position FIM becomes diagonal: 

Jpos = 1

σ2



2 0 00 1 + cos θ 00 0 2 sin 2(θ/ 2) 



= 1

σ2



2 0 00 1 + cos θ 00 0 1 − cos θ

 .

(17) From this diagonal form, the determinant evaluates directly as the product of the diagonal entries: det( Jpos ) = 4(1 + cos θ)(1 − cos θ)

σ6 = 4 sin 2 θσ6d4 . (18) Since sin 2 θ ≤ 1 with equality if and only if θ = 90 ◦, the FIM determinant is maximized precisely when the two sight lines are orthogonal. The maximum value is 4 /(σ6d4), achieved at the ideal triangulation geometry. The preceding derivation establishes that maximizing the FIM determinant is equivalent to maximizing sin 2 θ. It remains to connect this to a more familiar metric in the navigation and sur-veying literature: the Geometric Dilution of Precision (GDOP). The GDOP for position estimation is defined as the square root of the trace of the inverse FIM: GDOP =

q

tr( J−1pos ). (19) For the diagonal FIM structure above, the inverse is immediate as the following: 

J−1pos = σ2



1/2 0 00 1/(1 + cos θ) 00 0 1/(1 − cos θ)

 , (20) 6from which GDOP 2 = σ2 12 + 11 + cos θ + 11 − cos θ

!

= σ2 12 + 2sin 2 θ

!

.

(21) This expression makes the geometric dependence explicit. As 

θ → 0, sin θ → 0 and GDOP → +∞, reflecting the collapse of triangulation accuracy under collinear sight lines. Conversely, at θ = 90 ◦, sin θ = 1 and the GDOP attains its minimum value 

σ √5/2. Because GDOP 2 is a monotone decreasing function of sin 2 θ on (0 , π ), maximizing sin θ is fully equivalent to minimiz-ing the GDOP, and both are equivalent to maximizing the FIM determinant. These equivalences justify the use of the intersec-tion angle sine as the multi-UAV coordination objective function. So we define the objective function as the following: 

fsin = sin θ = ∥a × b∥∥a∥ · ∥ b∥ , (22) where a and b are the sight-line vectors from the target to the two UAVs. The cross-product formulation is coordinate-free and directly computable from the instantaneous relative positions of the platforms and the target, without requiring any angular decomposition into azimuth or elevation components. In the trajectory optimization framework, maximizing fsin 

drives the two UAVs toward an orthogonal viewing geometry. This prevents the multi-platform system from collapsing into a degenerate configuration where both observers occupy the same bearing direction—a failure mode that is particularly dangerous during long-duration tracking of high-maneuverability targets, where uncoordinated trajectories can converge onto similar flight paths. By incorporating fsin as an explicit objective function, the planner ensures that the dual-UAV formation maintains favorable triangulation geometry. In summary, under symmetric equal-distance assumptions, maximizing the intersection angle sine fsin = sin θ is equiva-lent to maximizing the FIM determinant and minimizing the position GDOP. This trifold equivalence provides both a theoret-ical foundation and a practical metric for real-time multi-UAV coordination in bearing-only target localization. 

3.4. Motion-Constrained PSO with Particle Normalization 

The objective functions established in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 are highly non-convex with numerous local optima, and their an-alytical derivatives are intractable due to the geometric coupling between UAV motion and bearing measurements. Evolution-ary algorithms are therefore natural candidates for this problem. Among them, Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) is particularly well suited because its population-based search explores multi-ple candidate trajectories simultaneously, and its gradient-free nature avoids the need for explicit derivative computation. However, applying conventional PSO directly to UAV trajec-tory planning encounters two practical obstacles. First, since the traditional methods treat the azimuth and pitch of UAVs as the optimization vectors, randomly generated particles may violate platform maneuverability limits, producing physically infeasible trajectories. Second, the weighted-sum aggregation of sub-objective functions requires tedious manual tuning of coe ffi cients when dealing with multiple sub-objective functions, and su ff ers from scale disparity among terms: the FIM term can range from 10 −6 in near-degenerate geometries to 10 4 in favorable ones, while the intersection sine is bounded in [0 , 1]. Without normalization, the large terms dominate the gradient and the swarm e ff ectively optimizes only these terms, ignoring the others. The consensus is that manual weighting can solve this problem, but ine ffi ciently. We address both issues through a two-stage enhancement built upon standard PSO. The complete optimization procedure is presented in Algorithm 1 (The same to PSO algorithm, c1

and c2 denotes learning factor, r1 and r2 denotes stochastic fac-tor, pgbest denots the best particle value discovered by the entire population, pbest  

> i

denotes the best value that the i-th particle has reached since the beginning of the search). The algorithm op-erates in a receding-horizon manner: at each planning instant, it receives the current UAV state ( p0, v0),where p0 presents to the position of the UAV at the last time and v0 presents to the velocity of the UAV at the last time, the current target state estimate ˆu(k), and the desired planning horizon. It then gener-ates a population of candidate next-waypoints, evaluates them using the spectrally-weighted FIM objective function and the intersection-angle objective function, and returns the waypoint with the highest information utility. The two key enhancements, motion-constrained initialization and projection and particle nor-malization, are embedded in the particle generation and fitness evaluation steps. 

Algorithm 1 Motion-Constrained PSO with Praticle Normaliza-tion 

Require: Current UAV state s1 = (p0, v0); target estimate ˆu(k); other-UAV state s2; interval t; swarm size n ; iterations k ;acceleration range of UAVs Ωa; velocity range of particles 

Ωv.

Ensure: Optimal waypoint p∗. 

> 1:

// Step 1: Motion-constrained initialization  

> 2:

for i = 1 to n do  

> 3:

ai ∼ U (Ωa); pi ← p0 + tv0 + 12 t2 ai 

> 4:

vi ∼ U (Ωv); pbest  

> i

← pi 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

// Step 2: First-generation normalization factors  

> 7:

Evaluate fspec , fsin at all pi; M(m) ← max i | f (m) 

> i

| for m =

spec , sin  

> 8:

// Step 3: Iterative evolution  

> 9:

for j = 1 to k do  

> 10:

for i = 1 to n do  

> 11:

Fi ← Pm wmf (m) 

> i
> M(m)

; update pbest  

> i

and pgbest  

> 12:

vi ← wvi + c1r1(pbest  

> i

− pi) + c2r2(pgbest − pi) 

> 13:

p′ 

> i

← pi + vi; a′ ← 2t2 (p′ 

> i

− p0 − tv0) 

> 14:

if a′ < Ωa then  

> 15:

a′ ← amax a′ 

> ∥a′∥

; p′ 

> i

← p0 + tv0 + 12 t2 a′ 

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

pi ← p′ 

> i

; re-evaluate fspec , fsin at pi 

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

return p∗ ← pgbest 

73.4.1. Motion-Constrained Initialization and Projection 

The first enhancement concerns physical feasibility. In algo-rithmic applications, the motion angles of UAVs are typically treated as the search space. While this approach has the advan-tage of reducing the dimensionality of the search space, it fails to account for the dynamic performance. For UAVs with iner-tial and actuator limits, waypoints optimized using traditional methods may require instantaneous turns or accelerations that exceed the capabilities, causing the inner-loop controller to fail to track the planned trajectory. Alternatively, such methods may fail to fully utilize the maneuverability of UAVs, resulting in overly tightly spaced waypoints. Algorithm 1 addresses this by encoding the kinematic model directly into the initialization as the following (Step 1, line 3): 

pi = p0 + tv0 + 12 t2 ai, (23) where the maneuver load ai is sampled from the admissible inter-val Ωa rather than the position space itself. This guarantees by construction that every particle represents a waypoint reachable within one sampling interval under the actual motion capabilities of the platform. 

> Figure 3: Feasible motion domains: (a) spherical domain assuming omnidi-rectional agility; (b) ellipsoidal domain considering velocity and acceleration constraints.

Geometrically, the set of all such positions forms an ellip-soidal feasible domain (as illustrated in Fig. 3), whose principal axes are determined by the velocity vector and the acceleration bounds. The spherical feasible region assumed in conventional PSO (which implicitly presumes omnidirectional agility) is re-placed by this physically grounded ellipsoid. The same motion model is enforced again during swarm evo-lution (Step 3, lines 9–12). When a particle’s velocity update proposes a new position p′ 

> i

, the algorithm computes the acceler-ation required to reach it from the current state in time t: 

a′ = 2t2 (p′ 

> i

− p0 − tv0). (24) If a′ exceeds the platform limit Ωa, the acceleration vector is clipped to the maximum magnitude ( amax ) and the position is projected back onto the ellipsoidal boundary. This projection step ensures that every iterate (not merely the initialization) re-mains dynamically feasible. The swarm therefore explores only the physically attainable subset of the search space, preventing the optimizer from wasting evaluations on unreachable way-points and ensuring that the returned trajectory can be executed by the autopilot without replanning or saturation. 

3.4.2. Particle Normalization for Adaptive Weighting 

The second enhancement addresses the multi-objective func-tion aggregation problem. Trajectory planning must balance information acquisition (via fspec ) and, in dual-UAV scenarios, triangulation geometry (via fsin ). A conventional weighted sum function is defined as the following: 

ftotal (u) =

X

> m

wm fm(u), m = spec , sin . (25) where wm represents the weight coe ffi cient, and satisfies 

Pm wm = 1. This function su ff ers from two defects. First, as noted above, the magnitudes of di ff erent sub-objective functions may di ff er by orders of magnitude. Without normalization, the largest term dominates the gradient and the swarm e ff ectively optimizes only that term, ignoring the others. Second, fixing constant weights across the entire mission is suboptimal because the relative im-portance of information versus geometric coordination evolves as the target maneuvers and the UAV-target geometry changes. Algorithm 1 resolves both issues through particle normaliza-tion (Step 2 and Step 3, line 6). During the first generation, the algorithm records the maximum absolute value observed for each sub-objective function across the entire swarm: 

M(m) = max  

> i∈[1 ,N]

| fm(pi)|, m = spec , sin . (26) These maxima serve as per-generation normalization denom-inators. The fitness of the i-th particle in generation k is then computed as the following: 

Fi =

X

> m

wm

fm(pi)

M(m) . (27) By construction, every normalized sub-objective function value lies in [0, 1] (or a similar range, due to the uncertainty in the distribution of particle states), so no single term can over-whelm the others regardless of its raw scale. The swarm there-fore receives balanced gradient contributions from both objective functions, preventing the trajectory planner from sacrificing tri-angulation geometry for raw information gain, or vice versa. It is worth noting that we have retained the weight wm, which facilitates more intuitive manual allocation rather than requiring multiple rounds of debugging, as is the case with traditional methods. Furthermore, we can even build upon this foundation to add more sub-objective functions while still ensuring that the optimization treats all cases equally. Moreover, because the normalization denominators are com-puted from the first-generation population, they adapt to the current operating region. In a long-range observation phase where all particles exhibit small FIM values, the normalized 8Table 1: Simulation parameters for single UAV observer scenario 

Entity Initial Position (m) Initial Velocity (m /s) Acceleration (m /s2) Trajectory Order Target [0 , 100 , 400] [−8, 0, 0] [1 , 1, 0.5] 2UAV [−1000 , 100 , 900] [10 , 0, 0] [1 , 2, 0] 2FIM term retains comparable influence to the intersection term. Conversely, during close-proximity tracking where FIM values are large, the same normalization prevents the FIM term from drowning out the geometric coordination objective function. This adaptive balancing is particularly important in dual-UAV scenarios, where the intersection-angle term must remain ac-tive to prevent the two platforms from converging onto similar bearing directions even as the individual FIM terms grow large. 

3.4.3. Integration with Trajectory Planning 

In the online execution loop, Algorithm 1 is invoked at each planning instant with updated state estimates. The returned waypoint p∗ serves as the reference for the UAV’s low-level controller for the next sampling interval t . At the subsequent planning cycle, the UAV’s measured position and velocity re-place ( p0, v0), the target estimator provides an updated ˆu, and the optimizer runs again. This receding-horizon structure allows the swarm to react to target maneuvers in real time: if the tar-get changes heading abruptly, the intersection-angle and FIM objective functions shift accordingly, and the swarm naturally migrates toward the new optimal geometry. In summary, Algorithm 1 combines motion-constrained initial-ization and projection with particle normalization, addressing the two principal limitations of conventional PSO in UAV trajectory planning. The motion constraints ensure that every evaluated waypoint is dynamically feasible, while the particle normaliza-tion guarantees balanced optimization across information and geometric objective functions without manual adjustments. 

4. Simulation 

To validate the e ff ectiveness of the proposed method, MAT-LAB was employed as the simulation platform to model a sce-nario involving multiple observation UAVs tracking a flying target. The trajectory planning for the UAVs was conducted us-ing both the conventional FIM-based trajectory planning method and our proposed method. Sections 4.1 and 4.2 present detailed analyses of the positioning accuracy and axial error distribution for single-UAV and dual-UAV target localization, respectively. 

4.1. Single-UAV Scenario 

The initial position of the target is set to (0 , 100 , 400) m with initial velocity ( −8, 0, 0) m /s and acceleration (1 , 1, 0.5) m /s2,executing parabolic motion. To demonstrate the superiority of trajectory planning methods, the initial position of UAV is set to ( −1000 , 100 , 900) m with initial velocity (10 , 0, 0) m /sand acceleration (1 , 2, 0) m /s2, also executing parabolic motion with the same Trajectory Order as the target. The setup of the simulation environment is shown in Tab. 1. To simulate observation errors, camera payload pixel extrac-tion error is set to 2 pixels, camera attitude systematic error to 0.1◦, camera attitude random error to 0 .05 ◦, and camera self-localization random error to 0.1 m. This section simulates single-UAV observation of moving targets, utilizing bearing-only measurements as the sole infor-mation source for target position estimation. The observation frequency of UAV was set to 10 Hz. During the initial 8 seconds, the UAV follows the predetermined trajectory. Subsequently, trajectory planning is performed every 2 seconds, with the UAV executing planned trajectories while continuously estimating the target position in real-time [38]. The experimental methods are designated as follows for the ablation study: D+PSO denotes the conventional D-optimality FIM with standard PSO (baseline); S+PSO denotes the spectrally-weighted FIM with standard PSO, testing the ef-fect of the spectral weighting objective function in isolation; 

D+IPSO denotes the conventional D-optimality FIM with the improved PSO (motion constraints and normalization), testing the e ff ect of the enhanced optimizer in isolation; S+IPSO de-notes the spectrally-weighted FIM with the improved PSO, repre-senting the full proposed method that integrates all contributions. 

4.1.1. Experimental Setup and Feasibility Verification 

Fig. 4 presents observer and target trajectories, and fig. 5 presents a comparison between the estimated target positions and the actual trajectory for 5 cases: Raw (No Planning), D+PSO ,

S+PSO , D+IPSO , and S+IPSO (proposed method). 

> Figure 4: Trajectories of target and single UAV observer.

Evidently, when directly employing the original parabolic tra-jectory for triangulation-based measurement (No Planning), the estimation erroneously converges to the UAV’s own trajectory. This phenomenon may be attributed to the initialization of the 9Figure 5: Convergence comparison of target localization. 

UAV’s motion parameters as prior values during target position estimation, causing the solution to rapidly converge to the UAV trajectory with minimal iterations based on the observation data. Through trajectory planning, the UAV can promptly escape from this erroneous convergence state and rapidly converge to the true target trajectory, regardless of whether the conventional FIM method or our proposed method is employed. The measure-ment results during the initial estimation in Fig. 5 approximate the UAV trajectory because the target motion parameter esti-mates obtained during the unplanned initial phase were used as initialization values. As the estimation process continues, the estimated position gradually converges toward the truth. 

4.1.2. Ablation Study and Accuracy Analysis 

To validate the accuracy of each component and eliminate the influence of stochastic factors, 100 Monte Carlo simulation trials were conducted. In each trial, the line-of-sight vector errors arising from pixel errors and self-localization errors followed a normal distribution. The measurement results at a specific convergence moment were recorded and statistically analyzed against the ground truth. Fig. 6 represents the statistical distribution of target position measurement errors using boxplots across the four methods. The results demonstrate that the adoption of planned trajectories renders the originally inestimable target position information measurable. The proposed method ( S+IPSO ) exhibits the most concentrated error distribution with the lowest median and the tightest interquartile range.                                     

> Table 2: Statistical comparison of localization errors for single-UAV scenario (meters)
> Method Median Mean Std Dev Outliers Max Min Raw –815.65 32.68 –––D+PSO 587.97 548.53 218.96 0820.39 166.36 S+PSO 587.82 548.49 218.44 0820.91 148.33 D+IPSO 4.94 8.38 8.03 539.58 0.06 S+IPSO 4.63 6.77 6.78 538.10 0.08

The ablation study results in Table 2 reveal distinct roles of 200 300 400 500 600 700 800    

> Values
> D+PSO S+PSO D+IPSO S+IPSO
> Data Set
> 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40
> Values
> Figure 6: Boxplots of localization errors for the four compared methods (single-UAV scenario).

the proposed components. Comparing S+PSO against D+PSO ,the replacement of D-optimality with the spectrally-weighted objective function while retaining the standard PSO yields negli-gible improvement (0.03% reduction in median error, 0.01% in mean error). This indicates that the spectrally-weighted formu-lation alone, without the motion-constrained optimizer, cannot overcome the limitations of conventional PSO in navigating the highly non-convex planning landscape. Comparing D+IPSO against D+PSO , the introduction of the improved PSO (motion-model-constrained initialization and adaptive normalization) while retaining the conventional D-optimality criterion produces a dramatic accuracy improvement: the median error is reduced by 99.16% and the mean error by 

98.47% . This confirms that the motion-constrained PSO is the dominant contributor to performance gain, as its physically grounded initialization prevents infeasible waypoints and the adaptive normalization stabilizes the optimization process. Finally, comparing S+IPSO (proposed method) against 

D+PSO , the integration of both the spectrally-weighted ob-jective function and the improved PSO achieves the best overall performance, with a 99.21% reduction in median error and a 98.77% reduction in mean error. Relative to D + IPSO, S + IPSO achieves an additional 6.28% median reduction and 19.21% mean reduction, demonstrating that the spectrally-weighted objective function provides further refinement when coupled with the improved optimizer. The spectral weighting reshapes the local optimization landscape near degenerate ge-ometries, allowing the swarm to more e ffi ciently exploit favor-able configurations once the motion constraints have brought particles into physically attainable regions. 

4.1.3. Axial Error Distribution Analysis 

To examine how localization errors are distributed across the three spatial dimensions, the target position estimation errors along the x, y, and z axes were extracted from the simulation results. Fig. 7 illustrates the localization errors along the x, y,and z axes during UAV target tracking. The results indicate that, under comparable total localization errors, the proposed method 10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100                        

> time
> -1000 -500 0
> err X(m)
> Raw D+PSO S+PSO D+IPSO S+IPSO
> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> time
> -100 0100 200
> err Y(m)
> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> time
> 0200 400
> err Z(m)

Figure 7: Localization error decomposition along x, y, and z axes for single UAV observer scenario. x y z

> Dimension
> 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
> Value
> D+PSO S+PSO D+IPSO S+IPSO

Figure 8: Box plots of localization error components for single UAV observer scenario. 

(S+IPSO ) yields more balanced error components across all three axes compared to the conventional FIM method ( D+PSO ), which exhibits strongly axis-dependent behavior. To mitigate stochastic e ff ects, the error components along the x, y, and z axes from the 100 simulation trials were statis-tically analyzed and presented as boxplots. Fig. 8 and Table 3 demonstrate the di ff erences in the distribution of axial errors. The conventional FIM method ( D+PSO ) achieves substan-tially di ff erent accuracy levels along di ff erent axes: the me-dian error along the y-axis (47.91 m) is an order of magnitude smaller than that along the x-axis (517.18 m), reflecting the anisotropic nature of D-optimality when the observer trajectory is predominantly aligned with one direction. In contrast, the pro-

Table 3: Axial error distribution comparison for single-UAV scenario (meters)                                                                                

> Axis Method Median Mean Std Dev Outliers Max Min
> x
> D+PSO 517.18 482.23 192.21 0721.04 147.51 S+PSO 517.04 483.19 191.76 0721.27 131.96 D+IPSO 4.62 7.63 7.19 535.49 0.04 S+IPSO 4.34 6.16 6.08 434.05 0.02
> y
> D+PSO 47.91 48.95 23.74 084.29 10.91 S+PSO 48.54 48.97 23.65 084.58 9.64 D+IPSO 0.43 0.66 0.62 82.97 0.004 S+IPSO 0.39 0.54 0.53 42.86 0.004
> z
> D+PSO 276.24 256.70 102.39 0386.06 76.16 S+PSO 276.24 256.70 102.15 0386.63 67.04 D+IPSO 1.77 3.39 3.54 617.26 0.02 S+IPSO 1.60 2.73 2.96 516.87 0.02

posed method ( S+IPSO ) reduces errors consistently across all axes. Notably, the y-axis accuracy remains the highest (median 0.39 m), while the x- and z-axis errors are brought to comparable levels (median 4.34 m and 1.60 m, respectively), indicating that our method slightly mitigates the directional bias inherent in conventional determinant maximization. 

4.2. Dual-UAV Scenario 

The target initial position is set the same as Section 4.1. Two UAVs’ initial positions are set to ( −1000 , 100 , 900) m and (−1000 , 0, 900) m, both with initial velocity (5 , 2, 0) m /s, execut-ing constant velocity motion (Trajectory Order is 1). The setup of the simulation environment is shown in Tab. 4. Observation error parameters are identical to Section 4.1. To simulate observation errors, camera payload pixel extrac-tion error is set to 2 pixels, camera attitude systematic error to 11 Table 4: Simulation parameters for dual-UAV scenario 

Entity Initial Position (m) Initial Velocity (m /s) Acceleration (m /s2) Trajectory Order Target [0 , 100 , 400] [−8, 0, 0] [1 , 1, 0.5] 2UAV 1 [−1000 , 100 , 900] [5 , 2, 0] [0 , 0, 0] 1UAV 2 [−1000 , 0, 900] [5 , 2, 0] [0 , 0, 0] 1

> Figure 9: Trajectories of target and dual UAV observers.

0.1◦, camera attitude random error to 0 .05 ◦, and camera self-localization random error to 0.1 m. This section simulates dual-UAV observation of moving tar-gets, utilizing bearing-only measurements from two platforms for target position estimation. The observation frequency was set to 10 Hz. During the initial 8 seconds, the UAVs followed predetermined trajectories to acquire su ffi cient target informa-tion. Subsequently, trajectory planning was performed every 2 seconds, and the UAVs were controlled to follow the optimized trajectories while continuously estimating the position of the target via triangulation. The experimental methods are designated as follows for the ablation study: D+PSO denotes the conventional D-optimality FIM with standard PSO (baseline); S+PSO denotes the spectrally-weighted FIM with standard PSO; D+IPSO de-notes the conventional D-optimality FIM with the improved PSO; DA +PSO denotes the D-optimality FIM with the inter-section angle sine and standard PSO, testing the geometric co-ordination objective function in isolation; SA +IPSO denotes the spectrally-weighted FIM with the intersection angle sine and the improved PSO, representing the full proposed method that integrates all contributions. 

4.2.1. Experimental Setup and Feasibility Verification 

Fig. 10 presents a comparison between the estimated target po-sitions and the actual trajectory for 6 cases: Raw (No Planning), 

D+PSO , S+PSO , D+IPSO , DA +PSO , and SA +IPSO .Unlike the monocular measurement scenario, the dual-UAV configuration enables adequate target information acquisition even when the UAV trajectory order is lower than that of the target motion, yielding relatively reliable target position esti-

> Figure 10: Convergence comparison for dual-UAV scenario.

mates. Nevertheless, trajectory planning enables the UAVs to achieve superior position solutions using the same triangulation algorithm. 

4.2.2. Ablation Study and Accuracy Analysis 

To validate accuracy and eliminate stochastic e ff ects, 100 Monte Carlo simulation trials were conducted. Line-of-sight vec-tor errors followed a normal distribution in each trial. Measure-ment results at a specific convergence moment were recorded and statistically analyzed.                                           

> Table 5: Statistical comparison of localization errors for dual-UAV scenario (meters)
> Method Median Mean Std Dev Outliers Max Min Raw 1.31 1.60 1.16 45.48 0.15 D+PSO 0.66 0.77 0.57 02.41 0.06 S+PSO 0.61 0.73 0.52 02.20 0.07 D+IPSO 0.63 0.79 0.67 72.96 0.03 DA +PSO 0.66 0.75 0.56 22.53 0.03 SA +IPSO 0.20 0.22 0.12 20.62 0.04

The ablation study results in Table 5 reveal important synergis-tic interactions among the proposed components in the dual-UAV setting. Comparing S+PSO against D+PSO , the spectrally-weighted objective function with standard PSO achieves a mod-est improvement: median error is reduced by 7.58% and mean error by 5.19% . This demonstrates that the spectral weighting provides some benefit in the dual-UAV context, likely due to its stabilizing e ff ect on the multi-objective function landscape, but the improvement is limited without the enhanced optimizer. 12 RAW D+PSO S+PSO D+IPSO DA+PSO SA+IPSO 

> Data Set
> 012345
> Values Figure 11: Boxplots of localization errors for the five compared methods (dual-UAV scenario).

Comparing D+IPSO against D+PSO , the improved PSO alone with conventional D-optimality yields mixed results: the median error is reduced by 4.55% , but the mean error actually increases by 2.60% , and the number of outliers rises from 0 to 7. This indicates that in multi-UAV scenarios, the motion-constrained optimizer without proper geometric coordination can destabilize the planning process. The particle normalization, when applied to the FIM objective function alone, may overem-phasize the information gain ignoring the triangulation geometry, leading to poor geometric configurations occasionally. Comparing DA +PSO against D+PSO , adding the intersec-tion angle sine objective function to the conventional D-opt +

standard PSO yields no improvement in median error (0.00% reduction) and only a marginal 2.60% reduction in mean error. This is a critical finding: the intersection angle objective func-tion, when paired with the conventional PSO and D-optimality, cannot e ff ectively guide the swarm toward favorable triangula-tion geometries because the standard optimizer lacks the motion constraints to execute the required maneuvers and the normal-ization to balance competing objective functions. Finally, comparing SA +IPSO (the full proposed method) against D+PSO , the integration of all three contributions— spectrally-weighted FIM, intersection angle sine, and improved PSO—achieves a 69.70% reduction in median error and a 

71.43% reduction in mean error. Relative to S+PSO (spec-tral weighting alone), SA +IPSO achieves an additional 67.21% 

median reduction, demonstrating that the intersection angle ob-jective function and the improved optimizer are essential for realizing the full potential of the spectral weighting. Relative to DA +PSO (intersection angle with conventional optimizer), 

SA +IPSO achieves a 69.70% median reduction, confirming that the intersection angle sine objective function requires the im-proved PSO to e ff ectively steer the dual-UAV formation toward orthogonal viewing geometries. 

4.2.3. Axial Error Distribution Analysis 

Following the approach in Section 4.1.3, the target localiza-tion errors along the x, y, and z axes were extracted from the 100                                                                                                                                

> Table 6: Axial error distribution comparison for dual-UAV scenario (meters)
> Axis Method Median Mean Std Dev Outliers Max Min
> x
> D+PSO 0.58 0.68 0.51 02.11 0.01 S+PSO 0.52 0.64 0.46 01.91 0.02 D+IPSO 0.58 0.74 0.64 72.79 0.01 DA +PSO 0.59 0.66 0.49 22.25 0.003 SA +IPSO 0.17 0.19 0.12 10.59 0.01
> y
> D+PSO 0.11 0.13 0.11 30.48 0.001 S+PSO 0.11 0.13 0.09 00.41 0.004 D+IPSO 0.04 0.05 0.04 00.15 0.001 DA +PSO 0.12 0.14 0.10 30.46 0.002 SA +IPSO 0.05 0.05 0.04 50.23 0.001
> z
> D+PSO 0.30 0.33 0.25 01.06 0.01 S+PSO 0.26 0.31 0.23 11.00 0.001 D+IPSO 0.19 0.26 0.22 60.96 0.01 DA +PSO 0.29 0.32 0.26 31.11 0.001 SA +IPSO 0.08 0.09 0.05 00.20 0.002

simulation trials. Fig. 12 illustrates the localization errors along three orthogonal axes for a representative trial. The results indi-cate that target localization errors following trajectory planning via our method are more uniformly distributed. To mitigate stochastic e ff ects, error components along the 

x, y, and z axes from 100 trials were statistically analyzed as boxplots. Fig. 13 and Table 6 demonstrate the di ff erences in error distribution across three directions. The results exhibit distinct characteristics across the methods. The conventional FIM method ( D+PSO ) achieves higher accu-racy along the y-axis but su ff ers from significant accuracy degra-dation in the other two dimensions. S+PSO (spectral weight-ing alone) shows modest balanced improvements. D+IPSO 

(improved PSO alone) achieves the best y-axis accuracy (me-dian 0.04 m) but produces numerous outliers in x and z (7 and 6, respectively), indicating unstable geometric coordination. 

DA +PSO (intersection angle with conventional optimizer) actu-ally degrades y-axis accuracy relative to D + PSO. In contrast, 

SA +IPSO (the full proposed method) appropriately relaxes the 

y-axis accuracy requirements to achieve balanced improvements across all three dimensions, with median errors of 0.17 m ( x), 0.05 m ( y), and 0.08 m ( z), most lower than the baseline. For dual-UAV observation, the proposed full method achieves a median accuracy of 0.20 m for 1100 m range targets, repre-senting a 69.70% improvement over conventional FIM methods. Furthermore, the proposed method exhibits more balanced axial error characteristics: while conventional FIM methods achieve high accuracy along the UAV motion direction but poor accuracy in other directions, the proposed method e ff ectively improves localization accuracy across all directions simultaneously. 

5. Discussion 

This paper proposes novel trajectory planning methods based on conventional FIM optimization. To validate feasibility and theoretical performance improvements, simulations were de-signed for single-UAV and dual-UAV observation scenarios of a single moving target. Comparisons were conducted among 13 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100                           

> time
> -2 024
> err X(m)
> Raw D+PSO S+PSO D+IPSO DA+PSO SA+IPSO
> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> time
> -0.5 00.5
> err Y(m)
> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> time
> -2 02
> err Z(m) Figure 12: Localization error decomposition along x , y , and z axes for dual-UAV scenario. xyz
> Dimension
> 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11.2
> Value
> D+PSO S+PSO D+IPSO DA+PSO SA+IPSO
> Figure 13: Box plots of localization error components for dual-UAV observers scenario.

Raw (no planning), D-optimality FIM with intersection an-gle ( D+PSO ), spectrally-weighted FIM with standard PSO (S+PSO ), D-optimality FIM with improved PSO ( D+IPSO ), D-optimality FIM and intersection angle with standard PSO (DA +PSO ), spectrally-weighted FIM with improved PSO (S+IPSO ), and spectrally-weighted FIM and intersection an-gle with improved PSO ( SA +IPSO ). Experimental results demonstrate that for single-UAV ob-servation, the proposed method achieves approximately 5 m terminal prediction point median distance error after planning, representing a 99.21% reduction compared to the conventional FIM method. For dual-UAV observation, terminal prediction point median distance error is reduced by 69.70% . The tra-jectory optimization algorithm exhibits superior performance in bearing-only localization tasks involving long-range, high-maneuverability targets. The ablation study design provides valuable insight into the individual and synergistic contributions of each proposed component. In the single-UAV scenario, the improved PSO emerges as the dominant factor: D+IPSO (improved PSO with D-optimality) achieves 99.16% error reduction, while S+PSO 

(spectral weighting with standard PSO) shows virtually no im-provement. This suggests that in single-observer settings, the primary bottleneck is optimizer feasibility and stability rather than the FIM criterion itself. The spectrally-weighted objec-tive function contributes marginal additional gain (6.28% over 

D+IPSO ) by refining local search near degenerate boundaries. In the dual-UAV scenario, the story is more nuanced. Here, no single component alone achieves substantial improvement: 

S+PSO provides modest gain (7.58%), D+IPSO yields mixed results with increased outliers, and DA +PSO shows no median improvement at all. Only when all three components are inte-grated ( SA +IPSO ) does the method realize its full potential. This strong synergy arises because the intersection angle objec-tive function demands precise geometric coordination that the standard PSO cannot deliver, while the improved PSO requires a geometric guidance term to prevent the normalization scheme from over-emphasizing FIM at the expense of triangulation qual-ity. The spectrally-weighted FIM stabilizes the multi-objective function landscape, ensuring that neither term dominates. However, one potential limitation of our method is its require-ment for adequate prior observation information to guarantee convergence. As described in Section 4.1.1, the UAV must first track the target along a predetermined trajectory for a period to acquire su ffi cient information. Without adequate prior observa-14 tions, convergence requires significantly longer duration. Second, in single-UAV observation scenarios, the target must not undergo drastic motion changes within short time intervals, otherwise localization accuracy may rapidly diverge. This funda-mental limitation arises because the proposed method employs Trajectory Intersection to obtain target motion parameters within short time windows. If the target undergoes abrupt motion changes, the Trajectory Order may change abruptly, leading to convergence failure. Future work will investigate adaptive weight adjustment mech-anisms for the multi-objective function and extend the frame-work to heterogeneous UAV swarms with mixed sensor modali-ties. Additionally, the development of online initialization strate-gies that reduce the required prior observation window would further enhance the practical applicability of the method. 

6. Conclusion 

This paper presents an online trajectory optimization method for bearing-only localization using single and dual UAV plat-forms in dynamic environments. Beyond conventional FIM con-siderations, the method incorporates an intersection angle sine objective function for dual-UAV coordination and a spectrally-weighted FIM objective function that provides stronger gradients near degenerate configurations. The planning method improves upon conventional Particle Swarm Optimization by incorpo-rating platform motion model constraints to prevent trajectory discontinuities and ensure physical feasibility. For objective function weighting, a particle normalization adaptive scheme is proposed based on PSO characteristics, addressing trajectory divergence under data singularity conditions. Simulation results demonstrate that for single-UAV scenar-ios, target trajectories are reasonably predicted, with terminal prediction point median distance error reduced by 99.21% after planning. For dual-UAV scenarios, terminal prediction point median distance error is reduced by 69.70% . Our method ex-hibits superior performance in long-duration bearing-only target localization of maneuverability targets at extended ranges. 

References 

[1] Jorge Pe ¨na Queralta, Niko L Taipalmaa, Barias Chakare Pullinen, Victor Kathan Sarker, Gia Thinh Nguyen, Tuan Nguyen Gia, Mohammed Sijad Ali, Matti Raitoharju, Tomi Westerlund, et al. Collaborative multi-robot search and rescue: Planning, coordination, perception, and active vision. IEEE Access , 8:191617–191643, 2020. [2] Wang Shule, Wang Jianhua, Li Xingxing, and Di Xi-aoguang. Uwb- and imu-based indoor positioning fusion algorithm for uav. Procedia Computer Science , 175:357– 364, 2020. [3] Freddy Demaine, Sanaa Sharafeddine, and Omar Farhat. An optimized uav trajectory planning for localization in disaster scenarios. Computer Networks , 179:107378, 2020. [4] Zhaoyu Zhang, Nan Li, Gongmin Yan, and Weiqi Li. The development of distributed cooperative localization algo-rithms for multi-uav systems in the past decade. Measure-ment , 256, 2025. [5] Václav Pritzl, Matouš Vrba, Petr Št ˘epán, and Martin Saska. Cooperative navigation and guidance of a micro-scale aerial vehicle by an accompanying uav using 3d lidar relative localization. In 2022 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS) , pages 526–535, 2022. [6] Zhenjing Guo, Feng Zhao, Yin Sun, Xin Chen, and Ruiying Wu. Research on target localization in airborne electro-optical stabilized platforms based on adaptive extended kalman filtering. Measurement , 234:114794, 2024. [7] Luka Kramari, Niko Jelui, Tomislav Radii, and Mario Mu-tra. A comprehensive survey on short-distance localization of uavs. Drones , 9(3), 2025. [8] Lang He, Pan Gong, Xiaofei Zhang, and Zheng Wang. The bearing-only target localization via the single uav: Asymptotically unbiased closed-form solution and path planning. IEEE Access , 7:153592–153604, 2019. [9] Steven C Nardone and Vincent J Aidala. Observability criteria for bearings-only target motion analysis. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , AES-17(2):162–166, 1981. [10] V. Aidala and S. Hammel. Utilization of modified polar coordinates for bearings-only tracking. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 28(3):283–294, 1983. [11] Sheng Xu. Optimal sensor placement for target localiza-tion using hybrid rss, aoa and toa measurements. IEEE Communications Letters , 24(9):1966 – 1970, 2020. [12] Sheng Xu, Yongsheng Ou, and Xinyu Wu. Optimal sen-sor placement for 3-d time-of-arrival target localization. 

IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , 67(19):5018– 5031, 2019. [13] Kutluyil Dogancay. Optimal geometries for AOA localiza-tion in the Bayesian sense. Sensors , 22(24):9802, 2022. [14] Augusto Aubry, Prabhu Babu, Paolo Braca, Antonio De Maio, and Kuntal Panwar. Sensor placement strate-gies for target localization via 3-d aoa measurements. 

IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems ,61(2):2134 – 2148, 2025. [15] Jianan Li, Zian Ning, Shaoming He, Chang-Hun Lee, and Shiyu Zhao. Three-dimensional bearing-only target fol-lowing via observability-enhanced helical guidance. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 39(2):1509–1526, 2023. [16] Jicheng Peng, Qianshuai Wang, Bingyu Jin, Yong Zhang, and Kelin Lu. Trajectory optimization to enhance observ-ability for bearing-only target localization and sensor bias calibration. Biomimetics , 9(9):510, 2024. 15 [17] Yingbo Fu, Ziwen Yang, Liang Xu, Yi Guo, Shanying Zhu, and Xinping Guan. Trajectory optimization of multiple uavs for bearing-only measurements. Ocean Engineering ,343:123308, 2026. [18] Peng Sun, Shiji Tong, Kaiyu Qin, Zhenbing Luo, Boxian Lin, and Mengji Shi. Low-cost real-time remote sensing and geolocation of moving targets via monocular bearing-only micro uavs. Remote Sensing , 17(23), 2025. [19] Nikolay Atanasov, Jerome Le Ny, Kostas Daniilidis, and George J. Pappas. Information acquisition with sensing robots: Algorithms and error bounds. In IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages 6447 – 6454, 2014. [20] Ruzena Bajcsy, Yiannis Aloimonos, and John K Tsot-sos. Revisiting active perception. Autonomous Robots ,42(2):177–196, 2018. [21] Benjamin Charrow, Vijay Kumar, and Nathan Michael. Information-theoretic mapping using cauchy-schwarz quadratic mutual information. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4971–4978, 2015. [22] Geo ff rey A. Hollinger and Gaurav S. Sukhatme. Sampling-based robotic information gathering algorithms. Interna-tional Journal of Robotics Research , 33(9):1271 – 1287, 2014. [23] Sanjiban Choudhury, Ashish Kapoor, Gireeja Ranade, Se-bastian Scherer, and Debadeepta Dey. Adaptive informa-tion gathering via imitation learning. In Robotics: Science and Systems , volume 13, 2017. [24] Marija Popovi´ c, Gregory Hitz, Juan Nieto, Inkyu Sa, Roland Siegwart, and Enric Galceran. Online informa-tive path planning for active classification using uavs. In 

IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA) , pages 5753–5758, 2017. [25] Julius Rückin, Liren Jin, and Marija Popovi´ c. Adaptive informative path planning using deep reinforcement learn-ing for UAV-based active sensing. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4473–4479, 2022. [26] Alfonso Sciacchitano, Liraz Mudrik, Sean Kragelund, and Isaac Kaminer. Multi-UAV trajectory optimization for bearing-only localization in GPS denied environments. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11116 , 2026. [27] Liraz Mudrik, Alfonso Sciacchitano, Sean Kragelund, Justin Kang, and Isaac Kaminer. Optimization of observer trajectory for coordinated bearing-only localization in con-strained three-dimensional scenarios. In AIAA Science and Technology Forum and Exposition, AIAA SciTech Forum 2025 , 2025. [28] Mohammadreza Doostmohammadian, Amin Taghieh, and Houman Zarrabi. Distributed estimation approach for track-ing a mobile target via formation of UAVs. IEEE Transac-tions on Automation Science and Engineering , 19(4):3765– 3776, 2022. [29] Xuesheng Qin, Kebo Li, Yangang Liang, and Yuanhe Liu. Minimum-e ff ort waypoint-following di ff erential geometric guidance law design for endo-atmospheric flight vehicles. 

Drones , 7:369, 2023. [30] Xingyi Pan, Xingyu He, Xiaoyue Ren, and Duo Qi. Spher-ical coordinate system-based fusion path planning algo-rithm for uavs in complex emergency rescue and civil environments. Drones , 10(4):285, 2026. [31] Rui Jiang, Ru Li, Zixuan Guo, Jianping Li, Kai Su, Zhe Cao, and Jian Li. Self-supervised learning of lidar 3d point clouds via motion estimation and fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04289 , 2026. [32] Jianan Wang, Lujun Wang, Zhuoran Wang, Liang Xie, and Huang Hu. Particle filter-guided online neural networks for multi-target bearing-only tracking in passive sonar systems. 

Sensors , 25(18), 2025. [33] Gregory Hitz, Enric Galceran, Marie-Eve Garneau, Francois Pomerleau, and Roland Siegwart. Adaptive continuous-space informative path planning for online environmental monitoring. Journal of Field Robotics ,34(8):1427–1449, 2017. [34] Apoorva Vashisth, Julius Ruckin, Federico Magistri, Cyrill Stachniss, and Marija Popovic. Deep reinforcement learn-ing with dynamic graphs for adaptive informative path plan-ning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 9(9):7747 – 7754, 2024. [35] Zican Zhou, Jiangping Hu, Xuesong Wu, Shangzhi Liao, and Jiao Yuan. Fixed-time target tracking and encirclement control for multi-UAVs with bearing-only measurements. 

Drones , 10(1):63, 2026. [36] Jinhui Dai, Wenqiang Pu, Junkun Yan, Qingjiang Shi, and Hongwei Liu. Multi-uav collaborative trajectory optimiza-tion for asynchronous 3-d passive multitarget tracking. 

IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,61:1–16, 2023. [37] Hanyu Wang and Xingqun Zhan. Energy-e ffi cient multi-uav cooperative localization by measurement scheduling. In Proceedings of the 38th International Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS + 2025) , pages 427–436, 2025. [38] Huayu Huang, Banglei Guan, Yang Shang, and Qifeng Yu. 3d trajectory reconstruction of moving points based on a monocular camera. Measurement , 256, 2025. 16