Title: RLMM-Flow: A Flow-based Mobile Manipulation Framework with Latent-Space Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.26460v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Jul 2026 00:29:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# RLMM-Flow: A Flow-based Mobile Manipulation Framework with Latent-Space Reinforcement Learning 

# Shuhang Wang, Ziming Li, Le Zheng, Hui Cheng 

Abstract 

Mobile manipulation requires generating whole-body action chunks that jointly satisfy goal reaching, collision avoidance, base kinematic constraints, manipulator joint limits, and tra-jectory smoothness. Flow-based generative policies provide an efficient paradigm for learning multimodal and tempo-rally consistent motion priors from expert demonstrations, but imitation-only training cannot improve policy quality be-yond the demonstration distribution. We propose RLMM-Flow, a flow-based mobile manipulation framework that com-bines expert flow-policy pretraining with latent-space rein-forcement learning post-training. The framework first learns a flow policy that captures a multimodal whole-body motion prior from expert demonstrations. The pretrained flow pol-icy is then frozen, while a latent steering network steers its initial noise toward higher-value action chunks. To stabilize high-dimensional latent optimization, we warm up an action-space critic before jointly training the latent critic and latent actor, and introduce coarse-to-fine latent steering that progres-sively expands control from a horizon-shared latent represen-tation to a full-dimensional residual representation. Experi-ments on mobile manipulation motion-planning benchmarks show that RLMM-Flow substantially improves task success, collision avoidance, and trajectory quality over imitation-only flow policies and existing reinforcement learning post-training baselines, while preserving fast flow-based inference. 

# Introduction 

Mobile manipulation requires coordinated base–arm trajec-tories that satisfy collision, kinematic, smoothness, and task constraints in cluttered 3D scenes (Khatib 1999; Zhang et al. 2025c; Ratliff et al. 2009; Schulman et al. 2013). Classical planners enforce such constraints but rely on accurate mod-els and task-specific objectives (Garrett et al. 2021; Mar-cucci et al. 2023). Generative policies instead learn multi-modal, temporally consistent action chunks from demonstra-tions (Chi et al. 2025; Ze et al. 2024; Ke, Gkanatsios, and Fragkiadaki 2025; Janner et al. 2022; Yan et al. 2025; Chen et al. 2025). Flow matching is especially attractive because it transports simple noise to whole-body trajectories with effi-cient inference (Lipman et al. 2023); however, imitation-only policies remain limited by the demonstration distribution. 

Copyright © 2027, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

Figure 1: The Real Scene Performance of RLMM-Flow. Although flow matching provides an efficient trajectory prior, imitation learning alone cannot improve generated motions beyond the demonstration distribution. Reinforce-ment learning offers a natural way to optimize planning quality, but directly applying it to multi-step flow policies remains challenging because likelihood evaluation, policy-ratio estimation, credit assignment, and gradient propagation through the full transport process are less straightforward than in conventional one-step policies. Latent-space policy improvement instead steers the initial noise of a frozen gen-erator (Wagenmaker et al. 2025); however, mobile manipula-tion still introduces three difficulties: the latent represents a high-dimensional full-horizon chunk, base and arm motions have heterogeneous roles, and simultaneous learning of ac-tion and latent critics gives the latent critic an unreliable early target. We propose RLMM-Flow , a flow-based mobile manipula-tion framework that combines expert flow-policy pretraining with latent-space reinforcement learning post-training. The framework first learns a point-cloud-conditioned flow policy from expert demonstrations and then freezes the pretrained flow policy while optimizing a latent steering network to improve whole-body action generation. Action-critic warm-up and coarse-to-fine latent steering further stabilize high-arXiv:2607.26460v1 [cs.RO] 29 Jul 2026 dimensional latent optimization. Our contributions are: 

• We propose a flow-based framework that combines expert pretraining with latent-space reinforcement learning for whole-body mobile manipulation. 

• We develop a cascaded latent steering architecture that predicts base-related latent variables before arm-related variables, explicitly modeling the dependency between global base motion and local manipulator motion. 

• We introduce a stable post-training strategy with action-critic warm-up and coarse-to-fine latent steering. 

# Related Work 

Diffusion and Flow Models for 3D Robot Control 

Diffusion-based and flow-based action models have re-cently emerged as expressive policy and planning represen-tations for robot control, enabling trajectory-level generation and multimodal action modeling beyond unimodal regres-sion (Janner et al. 2022; Chi et al. 2025; Zhang et al. 2025a). Recent 3D extensions condition diffusion policies on geo-metric and multimodal inputs, such as point clouds, scene tokens, language, and proprioception, to improve geometry-aware manipulation in cluttered environments (Ze et al. 2024; Ke, Gkanatsios, and Fragkiadaki 2025; Yan, Wu, and Wang 2025). In parallel, flow-matching policies learn continuous transports from simple noise distributions to robot action or trajectory distributions, offering a closely related gener-ative alternative with efficient inference for 3D visuomotor control (Chisari et al. 2025; Zhang et al. 2025a). Scene-conditioned diffusion models further incorporate planning and optimization into the denoising process, enabling phys-ically grounded motion generation in 3D scenes (Huang et al. 2023; Carvalho et al. 2023; Urain et al. 2023). For mobile manipulation, M2Diffuser (Yan et al. 2025) gener-ates whole-body trajectories from robot-centric 3D scans with constraint-guided denoising, while AC-DiT (Chen et al. 2025) improves base-arm coordination via diffusion trans-formers and adaptive 2D/3D conditioning. However, most methods in this line learn action or trajectory distributions from demonstrations or planner-generated data via super-vised denoising or flow-matching objectives, while planning-oriented variants often inject manually specified task objec-tives, costs, or constraints during inference. Reward-driven post-training of 3D-conditioned diffusion and flow policies for mobile manipulation remains comparatively underex-plored. 

Reinforcement Learning for Diffusion and Flow Policies 

Another line of work studies how to improve multi-step gen-erative policies, including diffusion and flow policies, with reward signals during or after policy learning. Prior work adapts diffusion policies through online policy represen-tations, Q-regularized offline RL, implicit value-weighted policy extraction, Q-score matching, and PPO-style fine-tuning (Yang et al. 2023; Wang, Hunt, and Zhou 2023; Hansen-Estruch et al. 2023; Psenka et al. 2024; Ren et al. 2025). For flow-based policies, recent methods further ex-plore offline Q-learning, stochastic flow fine-tuning, flow-policy gradients, and reward-driven flow matching (Park, Li, and Levine 2025; Zhang et al. 2025b; McAllister et al. 2025; Pfrommer, Huang, and Sojoudi 2025). Despite these advances, direct reward optimization of multi-step generators remains challenging: denoising or ODE transport makes like-lihood evaluation, policy-ratio estimation, and stable back-propagation less straightforward than standard policy opti-mization. Latent-space steering provides a complementary route: DSRL (Wagenmaker et al. 2025) and related latent-perturbation methods (Simsir and Oguz 2026) adapt frozen generative policies in noise or latent space, avoiding di-rect weight updates and back-propagation through the full generation chain. Existing latent-space reinforcement learn-ing methods are primarily designed for homogeneous ac-tion spaces and have not been extended to point-cloud-conditioned whole-body mobile manipulation. Moreover, they do not address the stability challenges arising from latent-space post-training in high-dimensional whole-body action generation. 

# Method 

Overview 

To address the above challenges, we propose RLMM-Flow, a flow-based mobile manipulation framework that combines expert flow-policy pretraining with latent-space reinforce-ment learning post-training. The framework consists of two stages. In the first stage, a flow policy is pretrained from ex-pert demonstrations to learn a multimodal whole-body mo-tion prior. In the second stage, the pretrained flow policy is frozen, and a latent steering network is optimized to steer the initial noise toward higher-value trajectories without modi-fying the generative policy. To improve the stability of latent optimization, we further introduce an action-critic warm-up strategy and a coarse-to-fine latent steering scheme. Given a robot-centric observation representation, RLMM-Flow generates a whole-body action chunk containing future mobile-base and manipulator motions. During inference, the optimized latent noise is used as the initial condition of the frozen flow policy, which then generates the final ac-tion chunk through flow transport. The overall training and inference pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2. 

Network Architecture 

RLMM-Flow consists of four main networks: a flow policy, a latent steering network, an action critic QA, and a latent critic QW . The flow policy is pretrained from expert demon-strations to learn a whole-body motion prior and generate action chunks. During latent-space reinforcement learning post-training, the pretrained flow policy is frozen, while the latent steering network is optimized to steer the initial noise toward higher-value trajectories. The action critic QA evaluates decoded whole-body ac-tion chunks in action space, whereas the latent critic QW

estimates the value of latent noise and provides guidance for latent-space optimization. Figure 2: Overview of the RLMM-Flow training and infer-ence pipeline. RLMM-Flow adopts the same robot-centric point cloud representation as M2Diffuser. The input point cloud consists of three components: (1) robot-body points, which describe the current geometry of the mobile manipulator and are gen-erated from the current robot state through forward kinemat-ics; (2) target points, which represent the desired end-effector pose; and (3) scene points, which describe the surrounding environment within the robot-centric local workspace. Each point is represented by its 3D coordinates together with an additional one-dimensional type feature indicating whether it belongs to the robot body, the target, or the scene. These point features are encoded by a Point Transformer (Wu et al. 2022) and fused with the current robot state, task goal, and flow-time embedding to obtain the scene representation shared by policy and value networks. The latent steering network adopts a cascaded Transformer architecture, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Since the mobile base and manipulator have different motion roles, the network first predicts the base-related latent component and then predicts the arm-related latent component conditioned on the base prediction. This structured latent steering captures the de-pendency between global navigation and local manipulation. The generated whole-body action chunk is represented as 

a = [ abase , a arm ] ∈ RH×d, (1) where H is the planning horizon and d is the total base–arm action dimension. The first waypoint is fixed to the current whole-body configuration to maintain continuity with the ex-ecuted trajectory. The network outputs (μW (s), log σW (s)) ,which parameterize a diagonal Gaussian distribution over 

RH×dw . A full temporal latent sample is obtained by repa-rameterization, wraw = μW (s)+exp(log σW (s)) ⊙ϵ, where 

ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ), enabling gradients from the latent critic to propagate through the sampled latent during training. The flow policy adopts a Transformer-based conditional flow architecture. Given the encoded robot-centric observa-tion representation, a noisy action chunk, and the flow-time embedding, the network outputs the velocity of each action token, which defines the continuous transport from Gaussian noise to expert whole-body trajectories through flow match-ing. 

Figure 3: Architecture of the cascaded latent steering net-work. The action critic QA evaluates the quality of decoded whole-body action chunks. It takes the robot-centric observa-tion representation and the generated action chunk as inputs. The observation feature and action tokens are embedded and processed by Transformer layers, followed by a value head that outputs a scalar action value. The latent critic QW has the same value-estimation structure as QA, but evaluates latent variables instead of decoded actions. 

Flow Policy Pretraining 

When pretraining the flow policy network, each expert trajec-tory is parameterized as a fixed-horizon whole-body action chunk containing H waypoints. We uniformly sample H

waypoints along the base trajectory according to arc length and synchronously interpolate the corresponding arm joint configurations to obtain aligned whole-body actions. The resulting action chunks provide a unified representation for flow-policy pretraining. We train the policy using rectified flow (Liu, Gong, and Liu 2023). Inspired by the log-normal noise-level sampling strat-egy of EDM (Karras et al. 2022), we replace uniform flow-time sampling with a logit-normal schedule: z ∼ N (μt, σ 2 

> t

)

and t = sigmoid( z), which emphasizes more informative intermediate-noise states and improves the learning of coor-dinated high-dimensional whole-body action chunks. 

Latent-space Reinforcement Learning Post-training 

Reward overview. Given a predicted whole-body trajec-tory τ = {qbh, qah}Hh=1 , we evaluate not only whether the end effector reaches the target, but also whether the com-plete base–arm motion is collision-free, kinematically fea-sible, and sufficiently smooth. Specifically, rgoal evaluates the terminal position and orientation errors of the end ef-fector. The base-kinematic term rlim penalizes violations of the nonholonomic motion constraints, such as excessive cur-vature and inconsistency between the base heading and its direction of motion. The collision term rcolli evaluates the obstacle clearance of the entire robot throughout the trajec-tory. The smoothness term rsmooth penalizes abrupt temporal changes in the whole-body motion, while rjoint penalizes arm configurations that approach or exceed the prescribed joint limits. To evaluate these terms consistently, we approximate the robot body by a set of collision spheres attached to the base and manipulator links. Forward kinematics maps these spheres into the workspace at every trajectory step. Their distances to the target and surrounding obstacles are then used to measure goal reaching and collision clearance, while their temporal displacements are used to evaluate whole-body smoothness. This representation allows the reward to account for the swept motion of the complete robot, instead of considering only the base center or end-effector position. The five raw components have different units and numer-ical ranges. We therefore normalize each component using fixed statistics computed from the offline dataset and clip the normalized value before aggregation. The normalized components are combined as 

r(τ ) = α1rgoal (τ ) + α2rlim (τ ) + α3rcolli (τ )+ α4rsmooth (τ ) + α5rjoint (τ ). (2) The complete collision-sphere construction, the exact defi-nitions of the five raw components, and the normalization statistics are provided in Appendix A of the supplementary material. 

Mixed-quality offline trajectories. Unlike flow-policy pretraining, which uses only high-quality expert trajectories, reinforcement learning post-training uses the mixed-quality dataset DRL initialized in Line 1 of Algorithm 1. Specif-ically, we combine high-quality and structured suboptimal trajectories generated by the same expert planner. Training only on highly successful trajectories concentrates rewards in a narrow high-value range and provides insufficient super-vision for low-value actions, which can cause the critic to assign overly optimistic values outside the expert manifold. Mixed-quality data broaden the value coverage and provide explicit high–low quality contrasts, thereby mitigating critic overestimation. The construction and composition of DRL 

are provided in Appendix B of the supplementary material. 

QA critic warm-up. As shown in Algorithm 1, we follow the basic value-distillation framework of DSRL-NA (Wagen-maker et al. 2025): an action-space critic QA evaluates the action chunks decoded by the flow policy, its values are dis-tilled into a latent critic QW , and QW subsequently guides the latent steering network πW . However, DSRL-NA jointly updates QA, QW , and πW from the beginning of training. As a result, the distillation target of QW continuously changes with the still-inaccurate QA. Meanwhile, updating πW also changes the action distribution evaluated by QA, producing a coupled moving-target problem. This instability is amplified for high-dimensional whole-body action chunks: early errors in QA are repeatedly propagated to QW and πW , causing la-tent optimization to oscillate or fail to converge. Therefore, during Stage 1 of Algorithm 1, we first perform Npre dedi-cated updates of QA while postponing the updates of QW and 

πW . During this warm-up stage, the next latent is sampled from the fixed standard Gaussian prior of the pretrained flow policy rather than from the still-untrained πW . Latent-value distillation and latent-actor optimization are activated only after QA has obtained a relatively stable action-value esti-mate. By temporarily decoupling early action-value learning Algorithm 1: Offline Reinforcement Learning of RLMM-Flow 

Require: Pretrained flow policy πW

> dp

, offline dataset DRL 

Require: Warm-up steps Npre , total steps T , discount γ

Require: Switch step tcf , residual scale λres , mixture coefficient ρ

1: Initialize B ← D RL , QA, QW , and Gaussian steering network 

πW

2: Initialize target critic ¯QA ← QA

3: Freeze πW

> dp

4: Define wcoarse (w) ← Repeat(AvgPool H (w), H )

5: Define wres (w) ← w − wcoarse (w)

6: Define CTF t(w) ←

(

wcoarse (w), t < t cf ,wcoarse (w) + λres wres (w), t ≥ tcf 

7: Let πW

> CTF ,t

(· | s) be induced by CTF t(μW (s) + exp(log σW (s)) ⊙ ϵ)

8: Define qt(w | s) ← ρN (0 , I ) + (1 − ρ) sg[ πW

> CTF ,t

(w | s)] 

Stage 1: Action-space critic warm-up 

9: for t = 1 , . . . , N pre do 

10: Sample (s, a, r, s ′, d ) ∼ B and w′ ∼ N (0 , I )

11: a′ ← πW

> dp

(s′, w ′)

12: yA ← r + γ(1 − d) sg  ¯QA(s′, a ′)

13: Update QA by minimizing  QA(s, a ) − yA2

14: Update target critic ¯QA

15: end for Stage 2: Latent-space offline post-training 

16: for t = Npre + 1 , . . . , T do Update action-space critic 

17: Sample (s, a, r, s ′, d ) ∼ B 

18: (μ′ 

> W

, log σ′ 

> W

) ← πW (s′), ϵ′ ∼ N (0 , I )

19: w′ 

> raw

← μ′ 

> W

+ exp(log σ′ 

> W

) ⊙ ϵ′

20: w′ 

> π

← CTF t(w′

> raw

), a′ ← πW

> dp

(s′, w ′ 

> π

)

21: yA ← r + γ(1 − d) sg  ¯QA(s′, a ′)

22: Update QA by minimizing  QA(s, a ) − yA2

23: Update target critic ¯QA

Update latent-noise critic 

24: Sample s ∼ B and w ∼ qt(· | s)

25: aw ← πW

> dp

(s, w )

26: yW ← sg[ QA(s, a w )] 

27: Update QW by minimizing  QW (s, w ) − yW 2

Update Gaussian latent steering network 

28: Sample s ∼ B 

29: (μW , log σW ) ← πW (s), ϵ ∼ N (0 , I )

30: wraw ← μW + exp(log σW ) ⊙ ϵ

31: wπ ← CTF t(wraw )

32: Update πW by maximizing QW (s, w π )

33: end for 

from high-dimensional latent search, this warm-up stage pro-vides a more stable distillation target for subsequent latent steering. 

Coarse-to-fine latent steering. Even with a warmed-up 

QA, directly optimizing the complete high-dimensional la-tent variable remains difficult. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the la-tent steering network adopts a cascaded architecture that first predicts the base-related latent component and then generates the arm-related component conditioned on the base predic-tion. This design explicitly models the dependency between global base motion and local manipulator motion. The net-work eventually produces a reparameterized full temporal latent sample wraw ∈ RH×dw . If all base and arm latent variables at all H time steps are optimized from the begin-ning, the actor must directly search a space whose dimension grows with the action horizon. This can result in temporally inconsistent corrections and further increase the difficulty of critic learning. To reduce the complexity of early latent search, we intro-duce the coarse-to-fine strategy described in Algorithm 1. The latent steering network in Fig. 3 contains a coarse main branch and a high-dimensional residual branch represented by the green arrows. In the coarse branch, the actor first produces the complete latent variable wraw and then applies average pooling only along the horizon dimension: 

¯w = AvgPool H (wraw ) ∈ Rdw . (3) Average pooling compresses the original H × dw latent se-quence into a single horizon-shared vector of dimension dw.Because the frozen flow policy still expects an initial latent variable with shape H × dw, we repeat ¯w over the horizon: 

wcoarse = Repeat( ¯ w, H ) ∈ RH×dw . (4) This repetition restores the tensor shape required by the flow policy and makes wcoarse dimensionally compatible with the subsequent high-dimensional residual addition. Although the tensor shape is restored to H × dw, all H temporal entries contain the same latent vector. Its effective search dimension therefore remains dw, rather than Hd w. Moreover, pooling is applied only along the horizon dimension and does not collapse the base and arm feature dimensions. The cascaded base-to-arm dependency illustrated in Fig. 3 is therefore pre-served. At this stage, the actor primarily learns a trajectory-level motion mode, including the global base trend and the overall coordination between the base and manipulator. We isolate the time-dependent residual component as 

wres = wraw − wcoarse . (5) In parallel, the residual module indicated by the green arrows in Fig. 3 represents this mean-centered residual and therefore preserves only the time-dependent high-dimensional variations in wraw . During early training, before the switch step tcf in Algorithm 1, this green residual path is not introduced into the initial latent of the flow policy, and we use 

wπ = wcoarse . (6) The actor therefore first learns a stable global motion trend in the lower-complexity shared latent space without being immediately exposed to all time-dependent degrees of free-dom. Once training reaches the switch step tcf , Algorithm 1 acti-vates the residual module represented by the green arrows in Fig. 3. The complete high-dimensional temporal component is then introduced into the initial latent of the flow policy through residual addition: 

wπ =

wcoarse , t < t cf ,wcoarse + λres wres , t ≥ tcf . (7) After the residual module is activated, the latent steering network recovers the ability to independently adjust indi-vidual action steps while preserving the global base–arm coordination learned during the coarse stage. These high-dimensional residuals mainly refine local obstacle clearance, terminal end-effector accuracy, joint motion, and trajectory smoothness. Finally, Algorithm 1 updates the latent steering network using the latent critic QW . The proposed strategy therefore first learns a low-dimensional global trend in a shared latent space and then introduces high-dimensional lo-cal corrections through the green residual module in Fig. 3, progressively recovering the full expressiveness of the cas-caded latent steering network. 

# Experiments 

Dataset Construction and Splits 

We collect whole-body motion trajectories in simulated in-door environments using REMANI (Wu et al. 2024) as the ex-pert planner. For each task, the planner takes a robot-centric 3D representation of the local scene, the current base–arm state, and a target end-effector pose, and returns a coordi-nated action chunk for the mobile base and manipulator. The generated chunks serve as high-level motion references and are executed by the same low-level MPC controller in all simulation and real-world experiments. The two training stages use the collected trajectories in different ways. Flow-policy pretraining uses the high-quality dataset DIL , which retains successful and physically feasible expert motions so that the policy first learns a coherent whole-body trajectory prior. Offline RL post-training instead uses the mixed-quality dataset DRL . In addition to high-quality trajectories, it contains structured suboptimal examples ob-tained by relaxing the convergence conditions of the expert planner. We evaluate our method on three types of tasks. Seen tasks are held out from training but are sampled from the training-scene distribution; unseen tasks are drawn from dis-joint simulated scenes; and real-world tasks use indoor point-cloud maps reconstructed with FAST-LIO2 (Xu et al. 2022) without real-world policy fine-tuning. Exact dataset sizes, trajectory filtering criteria, mixture composition, and evalu-ation splits are provided in Appendix B of the supplementary material. 

Compared Methods 

We first compare the imitation-only Base Flow policy with M2Diffuser with and without test-time optimization. This comparison examines the quality and efficiency of the pre-trained generative policy before RL post-training. All offline RL methods are initialized from the same trained Base Flow and use the same DRL . Action-space AWR (Peng et al. 2019) and action-space IQL (Kostrikov, Nair, and Levine 2022) update the policy directly in the complete action-chunk space. DSRL-NA follows its original compact-latent design, where the latent actor and critic oper-ate on a horizon-shared 1×dw noise vector. It does not use our temporal residual network. RLMM-Flow-QA adds only the QA warm-up, RLMM-Flow-CF adds only coarse-to-fine la-tent steering, and RLMM-Flow combines both components. All methods use the same training budget and shared settings wherever applicable. Complete reward weights, optimizer settings, flow-sampling parameters, and offline RL hyperpa-rameters are reported in Appendix C of the supplementary material. 

Evaluation Metrics 

We report success rate (Succ.), collision rate (Coll.), joint-limit violation rate (Joint Viol.), trajectory smoothness (Smooth.), inference time (Time), base path length (Base Len.), and manipulator joint path length (Arm Len.). Base Len. measures the accumulated travel distance of the mobile base, Arm Len. measures the total joint-angle variation of the manipulator, and Smooth. is computed from the second-order finite differences of the collision-sphere trajectories. A rollout is counted as successful only if the final end-effector position error is below 4 cm , the orientation error is below 20 ◦, and the complete executed trajectory contains nei-ther collisions nor dynamic-constraint violations. The same success criterion and metric definitions are applied to all methods in both simulation and real-world experiments. The exact pose tolerances and evaluation protocol are provided in Appendix B of the supplementary material. 

Simulation Results 

Pretrained Generative Policies Table 1 compares the pre-trained generative policies before RL post-training. Base Flow is safer and smoother than M2Diffuser w/o opt while also requiring less inference time. This indicates that the flow policy with logit-normal schedule can learn more ef-ficiently, whereas directly sampling from an unconstrained generative prior can still produce motions that violate envi-ronmental or kinematic constraints. Test-time optimization improves the feasibility of M2Diffuser by explicitly correct-ing these violations, but the iterative correction substantially increases deployment latency. Base Flow therefore offers a better quality–efficiency trade-off and provides a suitable frozen motion prior for subsequent reward-guided steering. 

Offline RL Post-training As shown in Table 1, action-space AWR and IQL provide only limited improvements over Base Flow and may degrade motion smoothness. Di-rectly optimizing the complete action chunk requires modi-fying tightly coupled base and arm motions over the entire planning horizon. Consequently, value-driven updates in the high-dimensional action space can introduce temporally in-consistent corrections and move the policy away from the coherent motion manifold learned during flow pretraining. DSRL-NA achieves better overall performance by steer-ing the frozen flow policy in its latent space. However, it trains the action critic QA, latent critic QW , and latent steer-ing network simultaneously. Because QW is supervised by values produced by QA, the continuously evolving action critic creates a non-stationary target for latent-value learn-ing. RLMM-Flow-QA addresses this problem by warming up QA before latent-space optimization, resulting in more reliable value guidance and better constraint satisfaction. 

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of whole-body trajectories generated by Base Flow, action-space AWR, action-space IQL, and RLMM-Flow. 

Figure 5: Representative simulation rollouts of RLMM-Flow in cluttered indoor scenes. RLMM-Flow-CF instead reduces the difficulty of early la-tent exploration by first optimizing a horizon-shared motion trend and subsequently introducing time-dependent resid-ual corrections, which is particularly beneficial for collision avoidance. Combining both components yields the most con-sistent performance across seen and unseen scenes, showing that critic stabilization and coarse-to-fine latent exploration provide complementary benefits. The trajectory comparison in Fig. 4 further shows that RLMM-Flow generates more coordinated base–arm mo-tion and maintains safer obstacle clearance than Base Flow, action-space AWR, and action-space IQL, consistent with the quantitative results in Table 1. Representative RLMM-Flow rollouts in cluttered scenes are shown in Fig. 5. 

Ablation and Stability Figure 6 evaluates both proposed components during offline post-training. The QA warm-up variant exhibits a steadier reward improvement. The coarse-to-fine variant first optimizes the horizon-shared latent and obtains a further improvement after the time-dependent residual branch is activated. The complete model maintains the strongest overall reward curve. Figure 7 isolates the effect of QA warm-up on latent-critic learning. Since QW is not optimized during the warm-up stage, the relevant comparison begins when latent-space post-training is activated. From this point onward, the warm-up variant exhibits a more stable latent-critic loss, indicating that a sufficiently trained action critic provides a less rapidly changing supervision signal for value distillation. 

Real-world Deployment 

The real-world platform consists of a Unitree Z1 arm, an AgileX Tracer base, and a Jetson AGX Orin. Point-cloud Table 1: Simulation results of pretrained generative policies and offline RL post-training methods on seen and unseen scenes.                                                                                                                         

> Seen Unseen Method Succ. (%) Coll. (%) Joint Viol. (%) Smooth. ↓
> Base (m) ↓
> Arm (rad) ↓
> Succ. (%) Coll. (%) Joint Viol. (%) Smooth. ↓
> Base (m) ↓
> Arm (rad) ↓
> Time (s) ↓
> Pretrained generative policies
> M2Diffuser w/o opt 26 32 20 0.30 6.13 8.72 10 50 25 0.39 4.90 8.55 0.56 M2Diffuser w/ opt 39 20 60.17 5.55 7.86 24 42 13 0.24 4.52 7.78 3.89 Base Flow 35 25 19 0.22 5.45 8.05 22 45 23 0.30 4.38 7.98 0.18
> Offline RL post-training
> Action-space AWR 36 26 18 0.24 5.52 8.16 25 46 22 0.32 4.44 8.10 0.19
> Action-space IQL 37 24 17 0.25 5.58 8.28 24 43 21 0.33 4.47 8.20 0.19
> DSRL-NA 40 21 14 0.22 5.49 7.92 30 39 17 0.30 4.41 7.86 0.21 RLMM-Flow-QA 42 18 90.20 5.40 7.61 34 37 13 0.28 4.35 7.58 0.21 RLMM-Flow-CF 43 15 12 0.22 5.43 7.83 33 34 15 0.30 4.37 7.76 0.21 RLMM-Flow 46 12 80.19 5.32 7.50 38 32 12 0.27 4.29 7.46 0.21

Table 2: Real-world deployment results for pretrained generative policies and offline RL post-training methods.                                                                       

> Method Succ.(%) ↑Coll.(%) ↓Joint Viol.(%) ↓Smooth. ↓Time(s) ↓Base(m) ↓Arm(rad) ↓
> Pretrained generative policies
> M2Diffuser w/o opt 825 16 0.39 0.56 5.10 8.40 M2Diffuser w/ opt 22 15 70.25 3.89 4.76 7.65
> Base Flow 16 19 13 0.32 0.18 4.64 7.90
> Offline RL post-training
> Action-space AWR 18 18 12 0.32 0.19 4.71 8.05 Action-space IQL 20 17 11 0.33 0.19 4.75 8.18 DSRL-NA 24 15 90.30 0.21 4.68 7.82 RLMM-Flow-QA 28 13 70.27 0.21 4.62 7.52 RLMM-Flow-CF 26 11 80.29 0.21 4.65 7.78 RLMM-Flow 32 960.26 0.21 4.57 7.44

Figure 6: Evaluation reward curves for the QA warm-up and coarse-to-fine latent-steering ablations. maps are reconstructed using FAST-LIO2. All policies are transferred directly from simulation without real-world fine-tuning and are executed with the same MPC controller. Fig-ure 1 shows representative real-world rollouts. As shown in Table 2, the real-world results follow the same trend as the simulation results. Latent-space steering outperforms direct action-space post-training, while combin-ing critic warm-up with coarse-to-fine steering achieves the best overall performance. RLMM-Flow improves success, safety, smoothness, and motion efficiency, while avoiding the costly test-time optimization required by M2Diffuser. 

Figure 7: Latent-critic training loss with and without QA

warm-up. 

# Conclusion 

We introduced RLMM-Flow, a flow-based framework for mobile manipulation that combines expert pretraining with latent-space reinforcement learning post-training. By us-ing action-critic warm-up and coarse-to-fine latent steering, RLMM-Flow improves training stability and better coordi-nates base and arm motions. Experiments in simulation and the real world show higher success rates, fewer collisions, and smoother trajectories, while maintaining fast inference. Detailed Reward Formulation 

In the mobile manipulation motion planning task, the robot is required to reach the target pose from the initial configuration without collision, while maintaining trajectory smoothness and satisfying kinematic constraints. To this end, we fol-low the geometric modeling strategy in REMANI (Wu et al. 2024) and represent the mobile manipulator as a set of col-lision spheres. We then define a trajectory-level reward r(τ )

for each whole-body action chunk. This reward is used as the transition reward in the Bellman target of the action-space critic. Specifically, let qi denote the whole-body configura-tion of the mobile manipulator at time step i. The robot con-sists of a mobile base and L manipulator links. For the l-th link, we place Ml collision spheres on it. The homogeneous coordinate of the m-th sphere center in the local frame of the corresponding link is denoted by l ¯pl,m . Through forward kinematics, its world-frame position is obtained as: 

W pl,m (qi)1



= W Tl(qi)l ¯pl,m ,l ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , L }, m ∈ { 1, . . . , M l}.

(8) Here, W Tl(qi) is the homogeneous transformation from the local frame of link l to the world frame; the first three en-tries of the transformed homogeneous point give W pl,m (qi).With this collision-sphere representation, the geometry of the robot body can be approximated by a set of spheres, which enables unified computation of goal reaching, environment collision, and trajectory smoothness rewards. This modeling strategy is consistent with the mobile manipulator geometry modeling in REMANI, where the robot body is approximated by collision spheres covering different links, and the sphere positions are computed through forward kinematics. Based on the above modeling, we first compute five raw reward components for each action chunk trajectory τ :

˜rgoal , ˜rlim , ˜rcolli , ˜rsmooth , ˜rjoint . (9) Here, ˜rgoal measures whether the gripper reaches the target region, ˜rlim constrains the kinematic feasibility of the mobile base, ˜rcolli penalizes collision risks between the robot and the environment, ˜rsmooth encourages smooth whole-body trajec-tories, and ˜rjoint penalizes manipulator joint-limit violations. These raw reward components have different physical units and numerical scales. Directly applying a weighted sum to these raw components would force the weights to serve two roles simultaneously: compensating for scale differences and encoding task importance, which may lead to an unstable re-ward design. Since our method is formulated under an offline RL setting, the training dataset DRL is fixed before training. Therefore, we pre-compute the mean and standard devia-tion of each raw reward component over the entire DRL and perform dataset-level normalization. For each reward com-ponent k ∈ { goal , lim , colli , smooth , joint }, its mean and standard deviation over DRL are defined as: 

μk = 1

|D RL |

X 

> τ∈D RL

˜rk(τ ), (10) 

σk = 1

|D RL |

X 

> τ∈D RL

(˜ rk(τ ) − μk)2

!1/2

. (11) Each reward component is then normalized as: 

rk(τ ) = clip 

 ˜rk(τ ) − μk

σk + ϵ , −c, c 



. (12) where we set ϵ = 10 −6 for numerical stability and use the clipping threshold c = 5 . These values and the normalization statistics are fixed throughout post-training and are shared by all offline RL methods. After dataset-level normalization, dif-ferent reward components have comparable numerical scales. Therefore, the weights αi mainly encode the relative im-portance of different objectives and constraints, rather than manually compensating for differences in physical units. The final reward used for offline RL is defined as: 

r(τ ) = α1rgoal (τ ) + α2rlim (τ ) + α3rcolli (τ )+ α4rsmooth (τ ) + α5rjoint (τ ). (13) We use the following reward weights in all offline RL experiments: 

α1 = α5 = 2 .5, α2 = 2 .0, α3 = α4 = 1 .5. (14) The relatively large α1 makes the goal-reaching term dom-inant in the reward, preventing the policy from generating overly conservative trajectories that fail to reach the target. The remaining constraint terms further distinguish trajecto-ries with similar goal-reaching performance in terms of col-lision risk, base kinematic feasibility, trajectory smoothness, and joint-limit validity. First, the goal-reaching reward measures whether the grip-per reaches the target region. Instead of directly using the distance between a single end-effector point and the target point, we compute the target error based on the collision spheres placed on the gripper. Let G denote the set of gripper collision spheres. The position of the m-th gripper sphere at the last trajectory frame qH is denoted as W pg,m (qH ), and its corresponding target position is denoted as W p∗

> g,m

. We first define the gripper geometric error as: 

dgoal = 1

|G| 

X 

> m∈G
> W

pg,m (qH ) − W p∗

> g,m
> 22

!1/2

. (15) Here, dgoal denotes the root-mean-square distance between all gripper collision spheres and their corresponding target spheres. Because the target specifies corresponding positions for multiple non-collinear gripper spheres, this geometric error captures both translational and orientational mismatch more faithfully than a single end-effector point distance. To avoid unbounded reward values when the target dis-tance is large and to improve the numerical stability of critic training, we define the raw goal reward as a bounded distance-progress function: 

˜rgoal = max 



1 − dgoal 

dmax 

, 0



, (16) where the goal-reward truncation distance is fixed to dmax =0.20 m . When the gripper exactly reaches the target pose, 

dgoal = 0 and ˜rgoal = 1 . As the target error increases, ˜rgoal 

decreases linearly. When the target error exceeds dmax , ˜rgoal is clipped to 0. Therefore, ˜rgoal ∈ [0 , 1] , providing a stable goal-reaching signal. Second, the base motion limit reward constrains the non-holonomic motion characteristics of the mobile base. For a differential-drive or non-holonomic base, the robot cannot generate arbitrary lateral displacement and should not pro-duce excessively large trajectory curvature. Therefore, we define the base limit term as a combination of a lateral-slip penalty and a curvature penalty: 

˜rlim = Lslip + λL κ, λ = 0 .1. (17) The lateral-slip penalty is defined as: 

Lslip = − 1

H − 1

> H−1

X

> i=1

(∆ xi sin θmid ,i − ∆yi cos θmid ,i )2

∆x2 

> i

+ ∆ y2 

> i

+ ϵ .

(18) where: 

∆xi = xi+1 − xi, ∆yi = yi+1 − yi,θmid ,i = θi + θi+1 

2 . (19) Here, ∆xi and ∆yi denote the base displacement between two adjacent time steps, and θmid ,i denotes the average head-ing angle of this motion segment. The numerator in Eq. (18) can be interpreted as the lateral component of the base mo-tion. A larger value indicates more severe lateral slipping, which violates the kinematic constraint of a differential-drive base and therefore reduces the reward. The denominator nor-malizes the term by the displacement magnitude, and ϵ is a small constant for numerical stability. For each segment, we compute the wrapped heading change and curvature as: 

∆θi = wrap( θi+1 − θi), κi = |∆θi|

p∆x2 

> i

+ ∆ y2 

> i

+ ϵ .

(20) The curvature penalty is defined as: 

Lκ = − 1

H − 1

> H−1

X

> i=1

softplus ( βκ(κi − κmax )) /β κ. (21) Here, κi is the absolute curvature of segment i. We set 

κmax = 2 .0 m −1, corresponding to a minimum turning ra-dius of 0.5 m , and set βκ = 10 to control the sharpness of the smooth approximation. When the trajectory curvature ex-ceeds this limit, the base is making a turn that may violate the minimum turning radius or the control capability of the real platform, and thus a penalty is applied. We use softplus( ·)

to ensure that the penalty is continuous and differentiable, making it more suitable for reinforcement learning. Third, the collision reward penalizes collision risks be-tween the robot and environmental obstacles. Let the total number of collision spheres on the robot be: 

Mtot =

> L

X

> l=0

Ml. (22) Based on the collision-sphere representation, we perform collision checking for every time step, every link, and every sphere on each link. By querying the environment ESDF, we obtain the distance from each sphere center to the near-est obstacle, denoted as DESDF (W pl,m (qi)) . We define the clearance between the m-th collision sphere on link l and the nearest obstacle as: 

δil,m = DESDF 

 W pl,m (qi) − rl,m . (23) Then, the collision penalty function is defined as: 

Φ  W pl,m (qi) =



−δil,m + ϵc

2 , δil,m < 0,

12ϵc



δil,m − ϵc

2

, 0 ≤ δil,m ≤ ϵc,

0, δil,m > ϵ c.

(24) The raw collision reward is the negative mean penalty over the full swept robot geometry: 

˜rcolli (τ ) = − 1

HM tot 

> H

X

> i=1
> L

X

> l=0
> Ml

X

> m=1

Φ W pl,m (qi) . (25) Here, rl,m denotes the radius of sphere m on link l, and the safety margin is fixed to ϵc = 0 .05 m . When the distance from the sphere center to the obstacle is smaller than the sphere radius rl,m , the robot is in collision with the envi-ronment and receives a large penalty. When the distance lies between rl,m and rl,m + ϵc, the robot has not yet collided but has entered the safety buffer region, and a quadratic penalty is applied. When the distance is larger than rl,m +ϵc, the sphere is considered safe and receives no penalty. Compared with directly checking collision for radius-free trajectory points, this formulation explicitly accounts for the geometric radius of each robot link and therefore better reflects the real colli-sion risk. Fourth, the trajectory smoothness reward encourages the continuity of whole-body motion. A common smoothness term penalizes the second-order finite difference of trajec-tory points to avoid sudden changes or jitter. We extend this idea to collision spheres and penalize the second-order finite difference of all spheres on all links over consecutive time steps: 

˜rsmooth = − 1(H − 2) Mtot 

> H−2

X

> i=1
> L

X

> l=0
> Ml

X 

> m=1
> W

pl,m (qi+2 ) − 2W pl,m (qi+1 ) + W pl,m (qi) 22 .

(26) This second-order finite difference can be interpreted as the spatial acceleration or trajectory bending degree of each col-lision sphere. If the motion of a link changes abruptly across consecutive time steps, the second-order difference of the spheres on that link becomes large and reduces the reward. By averaging over all time steps, links, and spheres, this term constrains the smoothness of the entire robot geometry in 3D space, rather than only constraining the end-effector or a few selected joints. Finally, the joint-limit reward penalizes manipulator joint angles that exceed their physical limits. This term is still computed in the joint space and does not need to be rewritten in the collision-sphere form. Let qji denote the angle of the 

j-th joint at time step i, and let qj 

> lower

and qj 

> upper

denote its lower and upper limits, respectively. The raw joint-limit reward is defined as: 

˜rjoint = − 1

Hn 

> H

X

> i=1
> n

X

> j=1

V (qji ). (27) where n denotes the number of manipulator joints, and V (qji )

is a non-negative joint-limit violation penalty: 

V (qji ) = 



qj 

> lower

− qji 

> 22

, if qji < q j

> lower

,

qj 

> upper

− qji

> 22

, if qji > q j

> upper

,

0, otherwise .

(28) When the joint angle is within its valid range, V (qji ) = 0 .When the joint angle is lower than the lower bound or higher than the upper bound, the violation is penalized according to the squared distance to the corresponding limit. Since 

˜rjoint is the negative average of joint-limit violations, more severe joint-limit violations lead to lower rewards. This term prevents the policy from generating physically infeasible ma-nipulator configurations when pursuing goal reaching or ob-stacle avoidance. 

# Dataset Construction and Evaluation Protocol 

Trajectory acquisition and dataset composition 

All policy-training trajectories are generated entirely in sim-ulation from 30 PhyScene (Yang et al. 2024) indoor scenes. REMANI is used as the whole-body expert planner. The two training stages use different subsets of the gen-erated trajectories. The imitation-learning dataset DIL con-tains 9,000 high-quality expert trajectories and is used only for flow-policy pretraining. A trajectory is retained as high quality when the REMANI optimizer converges, the final end-effector pose satisfies the task tolerance, and the com-plete trajectory is collision-free and satisfies the base and manipulator constraints. The offline RL dataset DRL also contains 9,000 trajecto-ries, consisting of 7,500 high-quality trajectories and 1,500 structured suboptimal trajectories. The suboptimal trajecto-ries are produced by relaxing the convergence and early-stopping conditions of trajectory optimization rather than by injecting unstructured random actions. Consequently, they preserve meaningful whole-body motion while exhibiting one or more interpretable defects, including incomplete goal reaching, insufficient obstacle clearance or slight collision, local nonsmoothness, excessive base curvature, or partial joint-limit violation. This 5:1 mixture exposes the critic to both high- and low-value action chunks, broadens value cov-erage beyond the narrow expert manifold, and reduces critic overestimation on poorly covered motions. 

Seen, unseen, and real-world evaluation 

The seen simulation split contains 900 held-out tasks sam-pled from the 30 training scenes. These task instances and their target configurations are excluded from policy optimiza-tion, although their scene distribution is shared with training. The unseen simulation split contains 900 tasks from 30 addi-tional PhyScene scenes that never appear during training. It therefore evaluates generalization to new furniture arrange-ments, obstacle layouts, and traversable spaces. Each method is evaluated on the same 100 real-world trials across 10 indoor environments, with 10 trials per environ-ment. A Livox MID-360 LiDAR provides range observa-tions, and FAST-LIO2 (Xu et al. 2022) is used for state esti-mation and local 3D point-cloud-map reconstruction. The re-constructed point cloud is transformed into the robot-centric frame before being provided to the policy. All policies are transferred directly from simulation: no real-world trajectory is added to DIL or DRL , and no online RL or real-world fine-tuning is performed. The generated action chunks are high-level reference tra-jectories rather than low-level motor commands. In both sim-ulation and real-world evaluation, the same low-level MPC controller tracks the generated base–arm trajectory while en-forcing executable commands. This shared controller isolates differences in high-level trajectory generation from differ-ences in low-level control. 

Success criterion and metric definitions 

A rollout is counted as successful only if the final end-effector position error is below 4 cm , the orientation error is below 

20 ◦, and the complete executed trajectory contains neither a collision nor a dynamic-constraint violation. Reaching the target after an earlier collision, or reaching the tolerance region and subsequently leaving it before the rollout termi-nates, is not counted as success. The same criterion is used for all simulation and real-world methods. Success rate (Succ.), collision rate (Coll.), and joint-limit violation rate (Joint Viol.) are reported as percentages. Coll. is the percentage of evaluated rollouts containing at least one collision at any executed time step. Joint Viol. is the percentage containing at least one manipulator joint-limit violation. Thus, multiple violations within the same rollout contribute only once to the corresponding rate. For an executed trajectory with N configurations, let 

pbi ∈ R2 denote the planar base position and let qji de-note manipulator joint j. Base path length and arm joint path length are computed as 

Lbase = 

> N−1

X

> i=1

pbi+1 − pbi 2 , (29) 

Larm = 

> N−1

X

> i=1 6

X

> j=1

qji+1 − qji . (30) The former is reported in meters and the latter in radians. The reported smoothness metric is the positive counterpart of the collision-sphere second-difference penalty in Eq. (26); lower values indicate fewer abrupt whole-body corrections. Inference time is the average wall-clock time required to produce one complete action chunk after the policy input is available; point-cloud-map reconstruction and subsequent Table 3: Dataset composition and evaluation splits. Real-world point clouds are used only for zero-shot evaluation.                              

> Split Scene source Scenes High quality Suboptimal Purpose
> DIL PhyScene 30 9,000 0Flow-policy pretraining
> DRL PhyScene 30 7,500 1,500 Offline RL post-training Seen simulation Training scenes 30 900 held-out tasks In-distribution task evaluation Unseen simulation Disjoint PhyScene scenes 30 900 tasks Scene-level generalization Real world FAST-LIO2 maps 10 100 trials Zero-shot real-world deploy-ment

MPC execution are excluded. All methods are timed under the same hardware and software conditions. 

# Implementation and Training Configuration 

Action-chunk construction and dimensions 

Each expert trajectory is converted into a fixed-horizon whole-body action chunk. We uniformly sample H = 50 

waypoints along the base path according to arc length and synchronously interpolate the six manipulator joint trajec-tories at the corresponding points. This removes horizon differences caused by unequal trajectory durations or sam-pling frequencies. Each waypoint contains the planar base variables (x, y, θ ) and six Unitree Z1 joint variables, giving 

d = 9 and 

a = [ abase , a arm ] ∈ R50 ×9. (31) The first waypoint is fixed to the current whole-body configu-ration to preserve continuity with the previously executed tra-jectory. The latent steering network uses the same temporal and feature dimensions and outputs (μW (s), log σW (s)) ∈

R50 ×9 × R50 ×9. A full temporal latent sample is obtained by reparameterization, wraw = μW (s) + exp(log σW (s)) ⊙ ϵ,where ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ). Average pooling in the coarse branch is applied only over the 50-step horizon, after which the pooled 9-dimensional vector is repeated 50 times before be-ing passed to the frozen flow policy. The time-dependent residual is defined as wres = wraw − wcoarse .

Flow-matching objective and sampling 

Let a1 ∼ D IL be an expert action chunk and let a0 ∼ N (0 , I )

be Gaussian noise. Rectified-flow pretraining constructs 

at = (1 − t)a0 + ta 1, v∗ = a1 − a0, (32) and minimizes 

LFM = E

h

∥vθ (at, t, s ) − (a1 − a0)∥22

i

, (33) where s contains the robot-centric point cloud, current robot state, and task goal. Following the EDM (Karras et al. 2022)-inspired non-uniform schedule described in the main paper, flow time is sampled as 

t = sigmoid( z), z ∼ N (−1.2, 1.22). (34) The flow policy is optimized with Adam for 2,000 epochs using learning rate 1 × 10 −4, batch size 256, momentum coefficients (β1, β 2) = (0 .9, 0.999) , and zero weight decay. During inference, the learned flow ODE is integrated using explicit Euler integration with 20 uniform steps. 

Offline RL objectives 

The offline data are organized as chunk-level transitions 

(s, a, r, s ′, d ), where a is a complete whole-body action chunk, the trajectory reward in Appendix is used as the tran-sition reward, and d ∈ { 0, 1} is the terminal indicator. For a decoded next action, the Gaussian latent steering network produces 

(μ′ 

> W

, log σ′ 

> W

) = πW (s′), ϵ′ ∼ N (0 , I ),w′ 

> raw

= μ′ 

> W

+ exp(log σ′ 

> W

) ⊙ ϵ′,w′ 

> π

= CTF t(w′

> raw

), a′ = πW

> dp

(s′, w ′ 

> π

),

(35) where CTF t(·) is the coarse-to-fine transformation defined in the main paper. Let ξ = ( s, a, r, s ′, d ) denote a transition sampled from B. The action critic is trained with 

yA = sg r + γ(1 − d) ¯QA(s′, a ′) ,

LQA = Eξ∼B 

h QA(s, a ) − yA2i

. (36) During the QA warm-up stage, before πW is optimized, the next latent is sampled from the fixed prior w′ ∼ N (0 , I ) and decoded as a′ = πW

> dp

(s′, w ′).Let πW

> CTF ,t

(· | s) denote the latent distribution induced by applying CTF t to a reparameterized sample from πW . To train the latent critic both on the original flow prior and near the current steering distribution, we use 

qt(w | s) = ρ N (0 , I ) + (1 − ρ) sg πW

> CTF ,t

(w | s) , (37) where actor-generated samples are detached during the QW

update. The latent critic is trained by value distillation: 

aw = πW

> dp

(s, w ),

LQW = E s∼B 

> w∼qt(·| s)

h QW (s, w ) − sg QA(s, a w) 2i

.

(38) where sg[ ·] stops gradients through the action critic and frozen flow decoder. The latent steering network is updated through the reparameterized objective 

wraw = μW (s) + exp(log σW (s)) ⊙ ϵ, wπ = CTF t(wraw ),

max 

> πW

E s∼B  

> ϵ∼N (0 ,I )

QW (s, w π ) .

(39) where the sampled latent is the coarse or coarse-to-fine latent defined in the main paper. Table 4: Definitions of the latent-space post-training variants. All unlisted settings are identical.            

> Method QAwarm-up Coarse-to-fine steering DSRL-NA No No RLMM-Flow-QA Yes No RLMM-Flow-CF No Yes RLMM-Flow Yes Yes

All offline RL methods are initialized from the same pre-trained Base Flow and use the same DRL . Adam is used for 

QA, QW , and πW with learning rate 3 × 10 −4 and batch size 256. We use discount factor γ = 0 .99 . After every action-critic update, the target critic is updated by Polyak averaging: 

¯QA ← (1 − τ ) ¯QA + τ Q A, τ = 0 .005 . (40) Post-training runs for T = 100 ,000 updates. The action critic is warmed up for Npre = 20 ,000 updates, the high-dimensional residual branch is activated at tcf = 50 ,000 ,the residual scale is λres = 0 .1, and the latent-mixture co-efficient is ρ = 0 .5. After warm-up, QA, QW , and πW are each updated once per iteration, giving a 1:1:1 update ratio. Evaluation reward curves are recorded every 5,000 updates on the held-out seen split. 

Baseline control and shared settings 

M2Diffuser w/o opt evaluates the learned diffusion trajec-tory prior without explicit correction, whereas M2Diffuser w/ opt applies its published collision, joint-limit, and smooth-ness objectives during test-time trajectory optimization. The action-space AWR and IQL baselines are initialized from the same Base Flow and perform policy improvement directly in the full 50 × 9 action-chunk space. DSRL-NA retains its original compact-latent design: its latent actor and critic op-erate on a horizon-shared 1 × dw representation, without our temporal residual network or mixed prior–actor sampling. In contrast, the RLMM-Flow variants use H × dw temporal la-tents. RLMM-Flow-QA and RLMM-Flow-CF are ablations within the RLMM-Flow architecture, while DSRL-NA is a separate architecture-faithful baseline. Training data, reward normalization, optimization budget, action horizon, obser-vation representation, flow decoder, and evaluation protocol are shared wherever applicable. 

Compute and real-world execution 

All models are trained on a workstation with NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs. The real platform consists of a six-degree-of-freedom Unitree Z1 arm mounted on an AgileX Tracer differential-drive base, with a Livox MID-360 LiDAR and an NVIDIA Jetson AGX Orin. FAST-LIO2 supplies state estimates and the local point-cloud map. The same MPC trajectory tracker is used for every method, and the first way-point of each newly generated chunk is anchored to the cur-rent measured configuration to avoid discontinuities between consecutive plans. For convenience, the principal hyperparameters are sum-marized in Table 5. Table 5: Principal training and reward hyperparameters.                                                                                  

> Parameter Symbol Value Parameter Symbol Value Action horizon H50 Action dimension d=dw9Flow learning rate –1×10 −4Flow batch size –256 Flow epochs –2,000 Euler steps –20 Logit-normal mean μt−1.2Logit-normal std. σt1.2
> RL learning rate –3×10 −4RL batch size –256 Discount factor γ0.99 Polyak coefficient τ0.005 Total updates T100,000 Critic warm-up Npre 20,000 CF switch tcf 50,000 Residual scale λres 0.1 Goal truncation dmax 0.20 m Safety margin ϵc0.05 m
> Maximum curvature κmax 2.0 m −1Curvature sharpness βκ10 Normalization constant ϵ10 −6Clipping threshold c5Latent mixture ρ0.5 Actor distribution –Diagonal Gaussian Reward weights (α1, . . . , α 5)(2 .5,2.0,1.5,1.5,2.5) Update ratio QA:QW:πW1:1:1

# References 

Carvalho, J.; Le, A. T.; Baierl, M.; Koert, D.; and Peters, J. 2023. Motion planning diffusion: Learning and planning of robot motions with diffusion models. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 1916–1923. IEEE. Chen, S.; Liu, J.; Qian, S.; Jiang, H.; Liu, Z.; Gu, C.; Li, X.; Hou, C.; Wang, P.; Wang, Z.; et al. 2025. Ac-dit: Adap-tive coordination diffusion transformer for mobile manipu-lation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,38: 64008–64036. Chi, C.; Xu, Z.; Feng, S.; Cousineau, E.; Du, Y.; Burchfiel, B.; Tedrake, R.; and Song, S. 2025. Diffusion policy: Visuo-motor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 44(10-11): 1684–1704. Chisari, E.; Heppert, N.; Argus, M.; Welschehold, T.; Brox, T.; and Valada, A. 2025. Learning Robotic Manipulation Policies from Point Clouds with Conditional Flow Match-ing. In Agrawal, P.; Kroemer, O.; and Burgard, W., eds., 

Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , vol-ume 270 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,982–993. PMLR. Garrett, C. R.; Chitnis, R.; Holladay, R.; Kim, B.; Silver, T.; Kaelbling, L. P.; and Lozano-Pérez, T. 2021. Integrated task and motion planning. Annual review of control, robotics, and autonomous systems , 4(1): 265–293. Hansen-Estruch, P.; Kostrikov, I.; Janner, M.; Kuba, J. G.; and Levine, S. 2023. IDQL: Implicit Q-Learning as an Actor-Critic Method with Diffusion Policies. arXiv:2304.10573. Huang, S.; Wang, Z.; Li, P.; Jia, B.; Liu, T.; Zhu, Y.; Liang, W.; and Zhu, S.-C. 2023. Diffusion-based generation, op-timization, and planning in 3d scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 16750–16761. Janner, M.; Du, Y.; Tenenbaum, J.; and Levine, S. 2022. Planning with Diffusion for Flexible Behavior Synthesis. In Chaudhuri, K.; Jegelka, S.; Song, L.; Szepesvari, C.; Niu, G.; and Sabato, S., eds., Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 162 of Proceed-ings of Machine Learning Research , 9902–9915. PMLR. Karras, T.; Aittala, M.; Aila, T.; and Laine, S. 2022. Elu-cidating the Design Space of Diffusion-Based Generative Models. In Koyejo, S.; Mohamed, S.; Agarwal, A.; Bel-grave, D.; Cho, K.; and Oh, A., eds., Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022 .Ke, T.-W.; Gkanatsios, N.; and Fragkiadaki, K. 2025. 3D Diffuser Actor: Policy Diffusion with 3D Scene Representa-tions. In Agrawal, P.; Kroemer, O.; and Burgard, W., eds., 

Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , vol-ume 270 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,1949–1974. PMLR. Khatib, O. 1999. Mobile manipulation: The robotic assistant. 

Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 26(2-3): 175–183. Kostrikov, I.; Nair, A.; and Levine, S. 2022. Offline Re-inforcement Learning with Implicit Q-Learning. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 . Open-Review.net. Lipman, Y.; Chen, R. T. Q.; Ben-Hamu, H.; Nickel, M.; and Le, M. 2023. Flow Matching for Generative Modeling. In 

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 .OpenReview.net. Liu, X.; Gong, C.; and Liu, Q. 2023. Flow Straight and Fast: Learning to Generate and Transfer Data with Rectified Flow. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 .OpenReview.net. Marcucci, T.; Petersen, M.; Von Wrangel, D.; and Tedrake, R. 2023. Motion planning around obstacles with convex optimization. Science robotics , 8(84): eadf7843. McAllister, D.; Ge, S.; Yi, B.; Kim, C. M.; Weber, E.; Choi, H.; Feng, H.; and Kanazawa, A. 2025. Flow Matching Policy Gradients. arXiv:2507.21053. Park, S.; Li, Q.; and Levine, S. 2025. Flow Q-Learning. In Singh, A.; Fazel, M.; Hsu, D.; Lacoste-Julien, S.; Berkenkamp, F.; Maharaj, T.; Wagstaff, K.; and Zhu, J., eds., Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , 48104–48127. PMLR. Peng, X. B.; Kumar, A.; Zhang, G.; and Levine, S. 2019. Advantage-Weighted Regression: Simple and Scalable Off-Policy Reinforcement Learning. CoRR , abs/1910.00177. Pfrommer, S.; Huang, Y.; and Sojoudi, S. 2025. Reinforcement Learning for Flow-Matching Policies. arXiv:2507.15073. Psenka, M.; Escontrela, A.; Abbeel, P.; and Ma, Y. 2024. Learning a Diffusion Model Policy from Rewards via Q-Score Matching. In Salakhutdinov, R.; Kolter, Z.; Heller, K.; Weller, A.; Oliver, N.; Scarlett, J.; and Berkenkamp, F., eds., Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , 41163–41182. PMLR. Ratliff, N. D.; Zucker, M.; Bagnell, J. A.; and Srinivasa, S. S. 2009. CHOMP: Gradient optimization techniques for effi-cient motion planning. In 2009 IEEE International Confer-ence on Robotics and Automation, ICRA 2009, Kobe, Japan, May 12-17, 2009 , 489–494. IEEE. Ren, A.; Lidard, J.; Ankile, L.; Simeonov, A.; Agrawal, P.; Majumdar, A.; Burchfiel, B.; Dai, H.; and Simchowitz, M. 2025. Diffusion policy policy optimization. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, 77288–77329. Schulman, J.; Ho, J.; Lee, A. X.; Awwal, I.; Bradlow, H.; and Abbeel, P. 2013. Finding Locally Optimal, Collision-Free Trajectories with Sequential Convex Optimization. In New-man, P.; Fox, D.; and Hsu, D., eds., Robotics: Science and Systems IX, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany, June 24 - June 28, 2013 .Simsir, H.; and Oguz, O. S. 2026. Lagrangian Perturba-tion Diffusion Steering: Latent Reinforcement Learning for Generative Policies. arXiv:2606.01151. Urain, J.; Funk, N.; Peters, J.; and Chalvatzaki, G. 2023. Se (3)-diffusionfields: Learning smooth cost functions for joint grasp and motion optimization through diffusion. In 2023 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , 5923–5930. IEEE. Wagenmaker, A.; Nakamoto, M.; Zhang, Y.; Park, S.; Yagoub, W.; Nagabandi, A.; Gupta, A.; and Levine, S. 2025. Steering Your Diffusion Policy with Latent Space Reinforce-ment Learning. arXiv:2506.15799. Wang, Z.; Hunt, J. J.; and Zhou, M. 2023. Diffusion Poli-cies as an Expressive Policy Class for Offline Reinforce-ment Learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net. Wu, C.; Wang, R.; Song, M.; Gao, F.; Mei, J.; and Zhou, B. 2024. Real-time Whole-body Motion Planning for Mo-bile Manipulators Using Environment-adaptive Search and Spatial-temporal Optimization. In IEEE International Con-ference on Robotics and Automation, ICRA 2024, Yokohama, Japan, May 13-17, 2024 , 1369–1375. IEEE. Wu, X.; Lao, Y.; Jiang, L.; Liu, X.; and Zhao, H. 2022. Point Transformer V2: Grouped Vector Attention and Partition-based Pooling. In Koyejo, S.; Mohamed, S.; Agarwal, A.; Belgrave, D.; Cho, K.; and Oh, A., eds., Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022 .Xu, W.; Cai, Y.; He, D.; Lin, J.; and Zhang, F. 2022. FAST-LIO2: Fast Direct LiDAR-Inertial Odometry. IEEE Trans. Robotics , 38(4): 2053–2073. Yan, G.; Wu, Y.-H.; and Wang, X. 2025. Dnact: Diffusion guided multi-task 3d policy learning. In 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 9464–9471. IEEE. Yan, S.; Zhang, Z.; Han, M.; Wang, Z.; Xie, Q.; Li, Z.; Li, Z.; Liu, H.; Wang, X.; and Zhu, S.-C. 2025. M 2 diffuser: Diffusion-based trajectory optimization for mobile manipu-lation in 3d scenes. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence .Yang, L.; Huang, Z.; Lei, F.; Zhong, Y.; Yang, Y.; Fang, C.; Wen, S.; Zhou, B.; and Lin, Z. 2023. Policy Representation via Diffusion Probability Model for Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:2305.13122. Yang, Y.; Jia, B.; Zhi, P.; and Huang, S. 2024. PhyScene: Physically Interactable 3D Scene Synthesis for Embodied AI. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2024, Seattle, WA, USA, June 16-22, 2024 , 16262–16272. IEEE. Ze, Y.; Zhang, G.; Zhang, K.; Hu, C.; Wang, M.; and Xu, H. 2024. 3D Diffusion Policy: Generalizable Visuomotor Policy Learning via Simple 3D Representations. In Kulic, D.; Venture, G.; Bekris, K. E.; and Coronado, E., eds., Robotics: Science and Systems XX, Delft, The Netherlands, July 15-19, 2024 .Zhang, Q.; Liu, Z.; Fan, H.; Liu, G.; Zeng, B.; and Liu, S. 2025a. FlowPolicy: Enabling Fast and Robust 3D Flow-Based Policy via Consistency Flow Matching for Robot Ma-nipulation. In Walsh, T.; Shah, J.; and Kolter, Z., eds., Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Thirty-Seventh Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, Fifteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2025, Philadelphia, PA, USA, February 25 - March 4, 2025 , 14754–14762. AAAI Press. Zhang, T.; Yu, C.; Su, S.; and Wang, Y. 2025b. ReinFlow: Fine-tuning Flow Matching Policy with Online Reinforce-ment Learning. In Belgrave, D.; Zhang, C.; Lin, H.; Pas-canu, R.; Koniusz, P.; Ghassemi, M.; and Chen, N., eds., 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 38, 106282–106319. Curran Associates, Inc. Zhang, Z.; Yan, S.; Han, M.; Wang, Z.; Wang, X.; Zhu, S.-C.; and Liu, H. 2025c. M 3Bench: Benchmarking Whole-Body Motion Generation for Mobile Manipulation in 3D Scenes. 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 10(7): 7286–7293.