OmniVLA: An Omni-Modal Vision-Language-Action Model for Robot Navigation
Noriaki Hirose1,2, Catherine Glossop1, Dhruv Shah3 and Sergey Levine1
OpenVLA 7B
ViT
Goal 
image
ViT
Proj.
Goal 
pose
Language 
prompt
Action head
OmniVLA:                                   
Omni-modal Vision-Language-Action model
Current
image
Zero input
for N steps
…
N actions
tokenizer
Fig. 1: We train a highly generalizable vision-based navigation policy with flexible conditioning, leveraging over 9,500 hours of data
collected across 10 different platforms. Our policy supports diverse goal modalities, including language prompts, goal poses, goal images,
and their combinations, and can control a variety of robot platforms.
Abstract— Humans can flexibly interpret and compose dif-
ferent goal specifications, such as language instructions, spatial
coordinates, or visual references, when navigating to a desti-
nation. In contrast, most existing robotic navigation policies
are trained on a single modality, limiting their adaptability to
real-world scenarios where different forms of goal specification
are natural and complementary. In this work, we present a
training framework for robotic foundation models that en-
ables omni-modal goal conditioning for vision-based navigation.
Our approach leverages a high-capacity vision-language-action
(VLA) backbone and trains with three primary goal modalities:
2D poses, egocentric images, and natural language, as well
as their combinations, through a randomized modality fusion
strategy. This design not only expands the pool of usable
datasets but also encourages the policy to develop richer
geometric, semantic, and visual representations. The resulting
model, OmniVLA, achieves strong generalization to unseen
environments, robustness to scarce modalities, and the ability to
follow novel natural language instructions. We demonstrate that
OmniVLA outperforms specialist baselines across modalities
and offers a flexible foundation for fine-tuning to new modalities
and tasks. We believe OmniVLA provides a step toward broadly
generalizable and flexible navigation policies, and a scalable
path for building omni-modal robotic foundation models. We
present videos showcasing OmniVLA’s performance and will
release its checkpoints and training code on our project page1.
I. INTRODUCTION
When navigating in an environment, humans naturally
use various modalities of information to infer and discover
paths to goals (e.g., looking up a GPS location in a map,
visual landmarks, and following language directions). How-
ever, prior work in robot navigation typically trains policies
with single modalities based on narrow applications. When
goals are nearby, it is convenient to describe them in a
language (for example, “move along the building and go to
the entrance”, while further goals can be described more
effectively as GPS coordinates. However, a truly general-
ist navigation policy must be able to perform tasks that
require us to leverage multiple sources of information to
1UC Berkeley, 2Toyota Motor North America, 3Princeton university
1omnivla-nav.github.io
be successful. For example, it might be most relevant to
specify a combination of GPS coordinates and landmark
images for tasks like autonomous delivery or inspection.
While these modalities overlap significantly, they provide
complementary information about the task and how it should
be performed, particularly in the context of the partial view of
the world that the robot receives from its sensors. Motivated
by this need, this study aims to train a generalizable policy
capable of navigating with goal specifications expressed in
multiple modalities. By training on omni-modal goals, we
aim to enable stronger and more flexible policies, ultimately
acquiring a foundation model that exhibits high adaptability
to novel modalities and unseen environments.
Training foundation models requires that we leverage as
much data as possible. With recent data collection efforts
in the robotics community, it has become feasible to train
powerful generalist navigation policies. However, these poli-
cies are typically trained with only a single kind of task
representation, such as egocentric images, 2D poses, or
natural language. This limits the datasets that can be used to
those that accord with the desired task representation (e.g.,
only datasets with language labels), restricts how the model
can be used at test time, and potentially limits how the model
processes the task and observation – i.e., more spatial or
visual tasks might improve the model’s spatial reasoning
abilities, while language tasks might provide a complemen-
tary benefit in enhancing understanding of semantics, much
like task mixtures for multi-modal language models [1, 2].
In this study, we propose a family of Omni-Modal Vision-
Language-Action Models (OmniVLA) for autonomous nav-
igation that can ingest goals expressed in multiple modalities,
leveraging information across modalities, and achieving a
more flexible navigation policy. We train our model with
goals specified through three primary modalities: (1) 2D
poses, (2) egocentric images, and (3) natural language. By si-
multaneously learning to interpret these different modalities,
the model must develop a richer understanding of the geo-
metric, visual, and semantic information of the task, resulting
arXiv:2509.19480v1  [cs.RO]  23 Sep 2025


in a more powerful navigation model. Moreover, our method
allows the user to instruct the robot with multiple modalities,
making it more user friendly and directly allowing the policy
to leverage more than one kind of information about a goal.
For example, a user can specify a target pose and provide
instructions on how to reach it through language.
To train these policies, we compose several design choices
into one system, resulting in a flexible and general navi-
gation policy. We use an expressive vision-language-action
(VLA) model as the base model [3], enabling us to lever-
age internet-scale knowledge from the VLM backbone [4]
and the representations learned during fine-tuning on cross-
embodiment robot data [5]. As a result, our policy exhibits
strong generalization and fine-tuning capabilities, following
language instructions not seen in the training data, and adapt-
ing to completely new modalities. Additionally, we address
the problem of modality imbalance and scarcity by using
modality dropout during training, and modality masking
during inference. This ensures that our policy attends to all
available goal modalities and learn from cross-modal goal
representations across all datasets.
OmniVLA is the first end-to-end VLA model for naviga-
tion that unifies diverse task modalities. Our results demon-
strate strong performance across all modalities, surpassing
specialist baselines trained for a single task or goal modality.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that OmniVLA can be effi-
ciently fine-tuned to new goal modalities and new environ-
ments using a limited dataset. We believe OmniVLA will
serve as a valuable resource for future navigation research,
both as a recipe for a generalist model and as a pre-trained
checkpoint for fine-tuning to specific modalities.
II. RELATED WORK
In navigation tasks, we can specify goals with various
modalities, such as egocentric images [6–9], 2D poses [10,
11], and language [12–15]. For egocentric image-conditioned
navigation, prior works [6–9] combine publicly available
datasets across various robot embodiments to train generalist
policies. These policies work well in indoor environments,
which require rich visual information and do not allow for
reliable access to GPS. 2D pose-conditioned policies are
most successful in long-horizon tasks in outdoor environ-
ments with GPS localization [10]. MBRA[11] introduces a
model-based reannotation approach to leverage large-scale
data sources to perform more challenging long-distance
navigation tasks conditioned on 2D goal poses.
Language-conditioned navigation offers a user-friendly,
flexible interface to instruct robots to reach a specific
target object or area in a given environment, even over
long distances [12, 16, 17]. However, robust instruction-
following demands language understanding beyond simple
object references. Early works relied on pre-trained language
encoders [12, 18], while recent approaches use powerful
VLM backbones, either using them directly to perform
navigation tasks [19] or fine-tuning them on robot data [20].
Other works have extended to using counterfactual action
generation [14] and non-robot data [15] to improve training
Llama 2 7B
SigLIP + 
Goal image
Proj.
…
Language 
Action head
0
DINOv2 
SigLIP + 
DINOv2 
…
…
Tokenizer 
…
…
0 0
…
0
0 for N steps
Current image
2D Goal 
pose
…
N steps actions
:non-masked tokens
:randomly masked tokens
by attention mask
prompt
Fig. 2: Network architectures for multi-modal vision-based
navigation. Our design builds on existing large VLA checkpoints,
adding a visual backbone and a projector to condition on egocentric
goal images and 2D goal poses. During training, we randomly mask
tokens for these modalities and the language prompt.
of these models. LeLaN [13] leverages both robot and
non-robot data to learn a generalized language-conditioned
navigation policy, using a model-based approach to generate
counterfactual actions that reach target objects along with
language prompts derived from VLM reasoning. While such
synthetic action commands and language prompts enable
scalable training [13–15], their inaccuracy can become a
performance bottleneck.
In manipulation, recent robotic foundation models (RFMs)
aim to unify vision, language, and action for generaliza-
tion [21, 22]. Evolving from early multi-modal transformers
to large-scale systems focused on dexterity and real-world
deployment, they mark a shift toward scalable frameworks
capable of robust, versatile robotic control [5, 23, 24]. Some
manipulation works leverage large datasets with different
observation and action spaces as well as conditioning (lan-
guage, poses, etc.) by masking unavailable inputs during
training [23, 25, 26] and demonstrate the benefits of simul-
taneously training on multiple input types [27].
Motivated by the success of previous work in the manipu-
lation domain, OmniVLA goes beyond prior navigation work
to leverage as much robot and non-robot data as possible
across multiple modalities and embodiments, learning a
policy that can condition on goal images, language, and GPS.
Notably, OmniVLA is trained on almost 10,000 hours of
real-world navigation data, which is the largest pre-training
dataset for an end-to-end navigation policy to our knowledge.
III. AN OMNI-MODAL VLA FOR NAVIGATION
We present OmniVLA, an end-to-end navigation policy
with omni-modal conditioning. OmniVLA effectively cap-
tures core navigation capabilities, such as collision avoid-
ance and path following, and can perform complex goal-
conditioned navigation behaviors through omni-modal user
inputs. Furthermore, to train OmniVLA, we leverage numer-
ous public datasets—each containing at least one modal-
ity—resulting in a model with strong generalization and
improved adaptability to new modalities and environments.


Dataset
Action
Modality
Environment
Name
Platform
Max. speed
Used Hrs
Raw
Hz
Labels
Lang.
Pose
Ego.
Sate.
GNM mixture [6]
6 platforms
0.5 – 5.0 m/s
62.0
✓
3.0
raw
✓
✓
Off-road, office, sidewalks
LeLaN mixture [13]
3 platforms
0.5 – 1.0 m/s
128.7
3.0
NoMaD
✓⋆
✓⋆
Office, home, sidewalks
Frodobots-2K [28]
ERZ
1.0 m/s
700
✓
3.0
MBRA
✓
✓
✓
Sidewalks
BDD-V [29]
Car
20.0 m/s
8680
✓
1.0
MBRA ⋄
✓
✓
Road
TABLE I: Training dataset mixture. Our training mixture consists of 9,500 hours across 10 different platforms, including human-
collected data, and covers a diverse set of environments. GNM and LeLaN are themselves mixtures of 7 and 5 (respectively) publicly
available datasets. The details are shown in the Appendix D. We use the satellite modality in the Frodobots dataset for evaluation of
OmniVLA’s ability to adapt to a new task. ⋆indicates labels that are synthetically generated, and ⋄indicates that a customized version
of MBRA was used to generate the refined action labels, described in the Appendix B.
A. OmniVLA Architecture
We build OmniVLA on top of a high-capacity VLA
architecture, which contains knowledge from Internet-scale
pre-training (for the base VLM) and cross-embodiment robot
actions (for the base VLA). We modify the architecture to
enable flexible goal-conditioning and omni-modal represen-
tation learning, while preserving the strong vision-language
priors in the base model.
Fig. 2 illustrates the network architecture, built on top
of OpenVLA [3], a 7B-parameter VLA model. We process
the robot’s current visual observations using a visual en-
coder. For goal-conditioning, our architecture supports three
different modalities — visual, positional, and language —
which can also be specified simultaneously. We project each
individual goal modality into a shared token space, which
serves as the input of the LLM backbone. We use “modality
dropout” to flexibly mask the goal modalities during training
and inference. For the action output, we follow OpenVLA-
OFT [30] and add a linear action head to the LLM output
to generate a sequence of actions {ˆai}i=1...N.
We also implement a smaller “edge” version of our
OmniVLA architecture built on top of ViNT [8], a 50M-
parameter navigation transformer. We modify this to add
multiple goal encoders and perform modality dropout in
the same way as our base model (see Appendix A). In
real-world evaluation IV, we find OmniVLA-edge to be a
very compelling choice for resource-constrained deployment,
where inference of large VLA models is not feasible.
B. Training OmniVLA
While using multi-modal inputs is enticing, training poli-
cies to accept omni-modal inputs requires compiling robot
datasets that support training and addressing the relative
imbalance and scarcity of the available modalities.
Training data. Table I lists the publicly available datasets
for vision-based navigation. This data is comprised of 13
publicly available datasets and contains 9,500 hours across
10 different embodiments. While most of these datasets
include manually collected labels, we also include data that
has synthetic labels, which may be noisier, and actions
refined with a re-annotation process. To our knowledge,
we compile the largest mixture of navigation datasets with
highly diverse environments, embodiments, and modalities
to train OmniVLA.
While large datasets enable generalization, large-scale data
collection efforts can result in more noise and therefore,
be less accurate. Following [11] and [13], we use synthetic
actions generated with MBRA [11] for the Frodobots dataset
and NoMaD [9] for the LeLaN dataset during training.
Since existing reannotation approaches cannot account for
the large embodiment gap of the BDD-V [29] dataset (an
autonomous vehicle dataset vs. the small robot datasets we
use otherwise), we train a reannotation model to generate
reasonable synthetic actions, making it possible to use this
data for training, similar to [11]. However, we found it was
reasonable to train directly with the high-quality raw actions
available in the GNM mixture. The details about the BDD-
V [29] dataset are shown in the Appendix B.
Training method. Following prior work for manipulation
VLAs [23], we use a form of random dropout to train on
all available modalities, resulting in a more efficient and
generalized model. To train OmniVLA, we construct a batch
of samples from the datasets included in Table I. For each
sample, we then independently sample from the available
goal modalities to form the conditioning input, which we
call tm. For example, for the GNM mixture, the conditioning
input can be chosen from 2D pose, egocentric goal image,
or their combination. Naturally, we get coverage over all
modalities and datasets while using this dropout mechanism
to improve training stability.
For each training step, we construct an attention mask that
excludes unused or unavailable modalities (filled with ran-
dom values) so that only the selected modalities are attended
to. Training on these mixed-modality batches encourages
the model to better represent goal information, yielding
improved representations for generalization and fine-tuning.
We train the OmniVLA policy described by {ˆai}i=1...N =
πθ(Ic, Ig, pg, lg, tm), where Ic, Ig, pg, lg and tm are the
egocentric current image, the egocentric goal image, the 2D
goal pose, the language prompt and the randomly selected
modality, respectively. We calculate the objective J with
Jil = 1
N
PN
i=1(aref
i
−ˆai)2 to imitate the N-step action ref-
erence {aref
i
}i=1...N and update θ to minimize J. Following
[13], the examples in the LeLaN dataset use an additional
task-specific objective to encourage object reaching behavior,
where the final action is trained to be close to the target
object. Details of the objectives are shown in the Appendix E.
Training details. We set the action chunk size N to 8


at 3 Hz, corresponding to 2.4 seconds for all models. For
each batch, we sample the data at a ratio of LeLaN : GNM
: Frodobots : BDD-V = 4:1:1:1 to balance modalities. Since
we cannot secure a sufficiently large batch size for some
models even on a server with multiple GPUs, we accumu-
late the gradient for several steps to stabilize the training
process. In training OmniVLA with OpenVLA checkpoints
on eight H100 GPUs, we use a per-GPU batch size of 7
and accumulate gradients for 4 steps, yielding an effective
batch size of 224 (=7×8×4). In addition, we apply LoRA
to limit the learnable parameters to about 5 %, allowing
us to maximize the batch size and balance training speed
with training stability. Note that LoRA is only used for the
OpenVLA-based model due to its large model size. The other
training settings, such as learning rate, language tokenization,
normalization, and so on, are the same as the default setting
in the original code for each model type.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We begin by describing our setup for evaluating omni-
modal navigation on our real-world robot platforms. We con-
duct extensive real-world evaluations and compare against
state-of-the-art specialist and generalist baselines.
A. Navigation tasks
We consider the following three navigation tasks:
Language-conditioned navigation: We evaluated Om-
niVLA on language prompts that not only direct the robot
toward the target location but also specify how it should
behave along the way. We conducted evaluations in 40
environments, including an office, a kitchen area, an entrance
hall, a public park, and sidewalks, using diverse language
prompts. The goals were placed 5–30 meters from the robot’s
initial position. To assess the benefit of large pre-trained
models, we introduced out-of-distribution (OOD) language
prompts that go beyond the instructions present in the train-
ing data. While the training data primarily contained object-
reaching instructions such as ‘move toward X’, we designed
OOD prompts that specified how to navigate toward the
target in half of the trials. Following CAST [14], we crafted
these prompts and evaluated the robot’s behavior based on its
adherence to instructions. We also selected 17 environments
where obstacles were placed between the robot’s start and
the target, making the tasks more challenging and testing
the core navigation abilities of the policy.
Egocentric goal image-conditioned navigation: With
egocentric goal images, our policy is tasked with navigating
the robot to target locations up to 3 meters away. To extend
this range, we follow prior vision-based approaches [8, 31,
32] and employ topological memory for navigation in 8
different environments, enabling navigation to more distant
goals. To build the goal graph, we record image observations
at 1 Hz. During deployment, we initialize from the first
observation and, at each time step, estimate the closest node
as the current location, as in [8, 9]. The image from the next
node is then provided as the goal image Ig to our policy.
Wide-field-view 
camera 
GPS and IMU
battery
Linear & 
angular vel.
ERZ
Nvidia RTX 4090 
Image 
& pose
PCB camera
Tracking camera
Nvidia Orin
Go1
PCB camera
Tracking camera
iRobot Roomba
Nvidia Orin
Vizbot
Fig. 3: Overview of the robotic platforms in our evaluation. Our
local PC with an NVIDIA RTX 4090 receives front-camera images
and pose signals, and sends velocity commands from our policy to
control the robot over the internet.
Goal pose-conditioned navigation: When conditioned on
2D goal poses, our policy navigates to targets 25–100 meters
from the initial robot position. We use GPS to estimate the
robot’s location and the location of the goal. At each step,
we compute the pose of the robot relative to the target pose,
pg. For evaluation, we selected 7 environments and ran 3
trials at different times in each, accounting for GPS jitter.
B. Mobile Robot Platforms
We evaluate OmniVLA on the FrodoBots ERZ plat-
form [33], a low-cost mobile robot in Fig. 3. It is equipped
with multiple sensors, including front and rear cameras,
GPS, an IMU unit (gyroscope, accelerometer, and compass),
and wheel velocity sensors on all four wheels. All sensor
streams are accessible through a web API, and our trained
navigation policies interface with the robot by sending linear
and angular velocity commands.
To assess cross-embodiment generalization, we evaluate
our policies on two additional platforms: the VizBot [34]
wheeled robot and the Unitree Go1 [35] quadruped.
C. Baselines
In our evaluation, we compare OmniVLA against seven
baselines across all modalities. This includes model-free
navigation policies trained from scratch [8, 9, 11], meth-
ods that can leverage internet-scale videos [13], methods
using off-the-shelf visual representations like CLIP [12],
as well as state-of-the-art VLA models [14]. For LeLaN,
CounterfactualVLA, ViNT, MBRA-pose, and MBRA-image,
we use the authors’ original implementation and checkpoints
for evaluation. Below, we describe two baselines that differ
slightly from their original implementations.
NoMaD [9]: For 2D goal pose-conditioned navigation,
we run the NoMaD policy in exploration mode to generate
30 candidate trajectories. We then select the trajectory whose
final predicted position is closest to the target pose pg and use
it to control the robot. For egocentric goal image-conditioned
navigation, we follow the original NoMaD implementation
using the goal image Ig.
CoW [8]: For language-conditioned navigation, we pro-
vide the current observation and prompts describing the
target object to the OWL-ViT B/32 detector [36], reported
as the strongest model in the original paper, to estimate the
object’s bounding box. Following [13], we crop the point
cloud within the box and compute the median point as the


Method
Language
2D Pose
Image
SR
Behavior SRS
SRC
SR
Prog.
SR
Prog.
CoW [12]
0.30
0.05
0.55
0.24
–
–
–
–
LeLaN [13]
0.43
0.15
0.64
0.35
–
–
–
–
CounterfactualVLA [14]
0.33
0.45
0.18
0.24
–
–
–
–
MBRA-pose [11]
–
–
–
–
0.86
0.92
–
–
NoMaD [9]
–
–
–
–
0.33
0.47
0.63
0.77
ViNT [8]
–
–
–
–
–
–
0.50
0.68
MBRA-image [11]
–
–
–
–
–
–
1.00
1.00
SmolVLA [39]
0.10
0.15
0.00
0.12
0.38
0.70
0.38
0.45
MiniVLA [38]
0.23
0.15
0.27
0.12
0.43
0.75
0.25
0.36
OmniVLA-edge
0.60
0.25
0.82
0.47
0.91
0.95
1.00
1.00
OmniVLA
0.73
0.65
1.00
0.65
0.95
0.98
1.00
1.00
TABLE II: Quantitative analysis for conditioning on single
modalities. SR and Prog. indicate the success rate and the partial
progress towards the goal, respectively. “SRS” averages over sim-
ple experiments without obstacles. “SRC” averages over complex
experiments with obstacles in the environment. Behavior indicates
the success rate in following OOD language prompts.
Train
Modality
Dataset
Test Modality
GNM LeLaN Frod. BDD
Lang. 2D pose Ego. image Sate. image
Language
✓
0.43
–
–
–
2D pose
✓
✓
–
0.86
–
–
Ego. image
✓
✓
✓
–
–
1.00
–
Sat. image
✓
–
–
–
0.19
Omni-modal
✓
✓
✓
✓
0.60
0.91
1.00
0.57
TABLE III: Ablation study of multi-modal training OmniVLA-
edge. We evaluate the performance of OmniVLA-edge when trained
on single and multiple modalities and evaluated with single modal-
ity task representations.
target object pose. To ensure fair comparison with our ap-
proach, which relies solely on a single RGB camera without
depth or LiDAR, we estimate depth using Depth360 [37]
and project it to reconstruct the point cloud. A state lattice
motion planner is then used to generate velocity commands.
Other VLA backbones: To further understand the role
of VLA architectures and pre-training, we also imple-
ment our omni-modal goal-conditioning strategy for the 1B
MiniVLA [38] and the 500M SmolVLA [39]. Please see the
Appendix C for details on these architectures.
V. EVALUATING OMNI-MODAL NAVIGATION
To evaluate our OmniVLA policies, we focus our experi-
ments on answering the following questions:
Q1 Does
omni-modal
pre-training
outperform
single-
modality navigation policies?
Q2 Can OmniVLA follow a composition of multiple goal
modalities?
Q3 Can OmniVLA be adapted to new goal modalities,
environments, and embodiments?
A. OmniVLA vs. single-modality policies
For Q1, we conduct a comparative analysis with single-
modality policy baselines, with results summarized in Ta-
ble II. The evaluation metrics are provided in the table
caption. Our largest model, OmniVLA, demonstrates a clear
advantage over each modality-specific baseline. This im-
provement stems from our policy’s ability to learn more
generalized navigation capabilities from our large, highly di-
verse training mixture, which is substantially larger than the
datasets available for individual modalities. Additionally, we
observe that the choice of pre-trained VLA architecture and
pre-training data has a significant impact on the performance.
Notably, OmniVLA demonstrates strong generalization on
language- and pose-conditioned tasks, outperforming the
strongest single-modality specialist.
Architecture comparison. While all the OmniVLA vari-
ants demonstrate the ability to generalize across modali-
ties, OmniVLA outperforms the smaller VLA models by
a wide margin. We notice that MiniVLA and SmolVLA
perform quite poorly, which can be primarily attributed to
the wide gap between their pre-training domains (MiniVLA
primarily trained on manipulation data) and limited capacity
(SmolVLA might not have enough capacity to learn useful
cross-embodiment representations). In contrast, OmniVLA-
edge adopts a more specialized architecture for navigation
tasks (described in the Appendix A), which enables it to
achieve exceptional performance for its size. However, there
remains a substantial gap between OmniVLA-edge and Om-
niVLA on language following, highlighting the benefits of
the vision-language priors inherited from pre-trained VLMs.
Image-conditioned
performance. OmniVLA matches
the performance as the strongest single modality baseline,
MBRA, achieving 100% success, and outperforming NoMaD
and ViNT. While NoMaD and ViNT are trained on the
more limited GNM mixture, MBRA leverages a much more
diverse pre-training dataset that enables strong generalist
performance. OmniVLA is trained on a combination of these
data sources, and is able to match this strong performance.
Pose-conditioned performance. OmniVLA achieves a
9% performance improvement in success rate (binary) and
partial progress towards the goal over the strongest specialist
baseline, MBRA-pose. While both policies leverage the same
large datasets for pose-conditioned navigation, with a high-
capacity model and additional data, OmniVLA is able to
outperform prior methods. This observation is particularly
impressive for VLA-based policies, as this is not well rep-
resented in the VLM/VLA pre-training.
Language-conditioned performance. OmniVLA demon-
strates a large improvement in goal-reaching and language
following on the diverse set of language prompts we evaluate.
While both OmniVLA and LeLaN are trained only with
in-domain language prompts from the LeLaN dataset, the
performance gap between OmniVLA and LeLaN is partic-
ularly evident on “Behavior”, which measures success in
following OOD language prompts. This result suggests that
leveraging a larger pre-trained LLM provides stronger priors
for navigation tasks. OmniVLA also outperforms Counter-
factualVLA, even though CounterfactualVLA is trained with
more diverse language prompts, as OmniVLA leverages a
larger backbone and a larger training mixture, which makes
it more general and flexible to OOD prompts. We also
evaluated NaVILA [15] using our prompts in the same
environment. However, NaVILA fails, scoring 0.0 on all
metrics, due to a domain gap in prompt style: it requires


[a] Case A
Head to dark green couch 
behind the left white wall
[b] Case B
Ours
LeLaN
CoW
Ours
LeLaN
CoW
Go to entrance door of building after 
passing between two pillars
Fig.
4:
Visualization
of
language-
conditioned navigation rollouts. OmniVLA
can follow OOD language instructions in
various indoor and outdoor environments.
Fig. 5: Visualization of goal pose- and language-conditioned navigation rollouts.
Conditioned on OOD language and a goal pose, our policy can perform complex,
long-horizon navigation tasks, reaching distant goals (b) while following behavioral
instructions.
detailed, step-by-step instructions such as “Turn right, move
straight, and stop when you see X,” even when X is already
visible and nearby, which is not in line with the open-set,
natural language prompt format we target.
Figure 4 illustrates rollouts of OmniVLA and the baselines
on two language-conditioned navigation tasks. Both scenes
are particularly challenging as the target objects are not
visible from the robot’s initial position, requiring the policy
to use the other information in the prompt to reach the goal.
Our method successfully follows the language instructions
and reaches the target object, whereas the baselines LeLaN
and CoW fail, navigating instead toward the incorrect object.
Dataset ablation. We conduct an ablation study to high-
light the benefits of training OmniVLA with a larger and
more diverse data mixture while keeping the model archi-
tecture fixed. We train versions of OmniVLA-edge, each on
a single modality, and compare them with our multi-modal
OmniVLA-edge policy. Table III summarizes the datasets
used for training model and reports the goal-reaching rates
for each task. For this evaluation, we also introduce satellite
images as a goal modality and assess performance under
the same environments and setup as 2D goal-pose naviga-
tion. As shown in Table III, OmniVLA demonstrates clear
advantages, particularly in language- and satellite image-
conditioned navigation. By jointly training across multiple
modalities, OmniVLA learns core navigation behaviors from
all datasets and achieves stronger generalization to unseen
environments compared to single-modality policies trained
on limited data. In addition, we observe that including highly
varied cross-embodiment data, the BDD-V dataset, enables
the policy to succeed in roughly half of the failed cases of
a policy trained without BDD-V, highlighting the ability of
OmniVLA to ingest and benefit from diverse data sources.
B. Omni-modal conditioning with OmniVLA
By training on omni-modal task representations, Om-
niVLA can learn to follow multiple goal signals. Towards
answering Q2, we conduct experiments where tasks are
specified by providing both 2D goal poses (where?) and
behavioral language instructions (how?) in 10 different en-
vironments. In each environment, we provide a 2D position
located 25–100 meters from the robot’s initial position, along
with a language prompt that specifies a behavior that the
robot must follow to reach the goal, such as “move along
the wall”, “move on the grass”, and “move between objects
A and B”. These prompts are out-of-distribution (OOD) and
not included in the training dataset. To our knowledge, no
existing work has explored such a challenging composition
of modalities in navigation.
Since no existing methods can handle both modalities
simultaneously, we compare our approach to specialist
baselines trained with 2D pose conditioning (NoMaD and
MBRA-pose, Table IV). OmniVLA demonstrates the ability
to attend to the information of both the prompt and the goal
pose, achieving 80% success and experiencing only a 5%
drop in language capabilities from Table II. The smaller
OmniVLA variant fails to handle the language instructions
due to limited modal capacity. The other VLA baselines
(SmolVLA and MiniVLA) are also unable to solve the task.
C. Adapting OmniVLA to new goal modalities
To evaluate OmniVLA’s capabilities as a “foundation
model” for navigation and answer Q3, we assess three
aspects: (i) learning a new goal modality, (ii) fine-tuning on
new datasets, and (iii) controlling new robot embodiments.
For (i), we set up a controlled experiment by pre-training
OmniVLA-edge without the satellite modality. We then
freeze most of the model and replace the vision encoders for
egocentric image goals with one for satellite images, training
only the swapped encoder. With this model, we evaluate the
adaptability of our model to leverage new goal modalities.
We find that OmniVLA-edge can indeed adapt to this new
modality, improving significantly over a specialist policy
trained only for satellite goal navigation (0.19 →0.62).
This suggests that the cross-modal representations learned by
OmniVLA can facilitate learning new tasks, while retaining
useful navigation affordances learned during pre-training.
To evaluate (ii), we conduct two experiments to investigate
OmniVLA’s capability to adapt to new data: (a) adapting to
new environments using a small dataset, and (b) learning
a new language domain from a new available dataset. For
(a), we collect 1.2 hours of data, including 2D goal poses
and satellite images, from test environments unseen during
training, and fine-tune the trained OmniVLA-edge to eval-
uate adaptability. Table V shows that the fine-tuned policy
improves performance on both modalities, suggesting that
OmniVLA can effectively adapt to new environments. For
(b), we fine-tune our OmniVLA using the recently published
CounterfactualVLA dataset, which contains more diverse
language prompts (see [14]). To stabilize fine-tuning, we
sample batches to maintain the balance between modalities
used in our prior training. Specifically, half of the data


Method
SR
Prog.
Behavior
SmolVLA [39]
0.10
0.35
0.20
MiniVLA [38]
0.30
0.53
0.00
NoMaD [9]
0.40
0.57
–
MBRA-pose [11]
0.70
0.80
–
OmniVLA [30]
0.80
0.86
0.60
OmniVLA-edge [8]
0.30
0.56
0.10
TABLE
IV:
OmniVLA
excels
at
omni-modal
navigation,
reaching
a
goal position (where) while following
language instructions (how).
Modality
Fine-tune
SR
Prog.
Sat. goal image
0.57
0.75
Sat. goal image
✓
0.83
0.92
2D goal pose
0.81
0.90
2D goal pose
✓
0.86
0.96
TABLE V: Adapting OmniVLA -
edge to new environments. We adapt
our model using only 1.2 hours of data,
focusing on satellite goal images and
2D goal poses.
Go to the closed 
right door
Go into the left room
Move toward black cart 
along white boards
Move toward 
black cart along 
grass walls
black cart
Fig. 6: Deploying OmniVLA on multiple embodi-
ments. We deploy our policy on the Vizbot and Unitree
Go1 robots. Our policy can follow natural language
instructions out of the box and reach the targets.
previously sampled from LeLaN is replaced with Coun-
terfactualVLA data when fine-tuning OmniVLA. The fine-
tuned policy achieves scores (SR, Behavior, SRS, SRC) =
(0.825, 0.700, 1.000, 0.765), improving over the original
scores (0.725, 0.650, 1.000, 0.647), demonstrating the ability
of OmniVLA to learn new language domains from emerging
datasets. Because the CounterfactualVLA dataset provides
both raw and counterfactual robot actions corresponding to
diverse language prompts, our policy learns better collision
avoidance and instruction-following, with notable improve-
ments in “Behavior” and “SRC”.
To show the generality of our model trained on data from
several robots for (iii), we demonstrate deployment on two
additional platforms: the wheeled mobile robot VizBot and
the quadruped robot Go1. We mount different cameras on
the robots and test them on the most challenging language-
conditioned navigation tasks. As shown in Fig. 6, our best
OmniVLA enables both robots to follow language instruc-
tions and reach the target locations.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we introduced OmniVLA, an omni-modal
vision-language-action model for robot navigation. Our pol-
icy flexibly interprets multiple goal modalities, including lan-
guage prompts, 2D poses, egocentric goal images, and their
combinations, within a unified framework. By initializing
from pre-trained VLAs, OmniVLA leverages Internet-scale
knowledge while being trained on over 9,500 hours of robotic
navigation experience across ten robot platforms.
Extensive real-world evaluations show that OmniVLA
consistently outperforms prior baselines, achieving stronger
performance across modalities, robust out-of-distribution
generalization, and the ability to follow diverse multi-modal
tasks. Furthermore, we demonstrate foundation model qual-
ities, including adaptability to new modalities (e.g., satellite
imagery), efficient fine-tuning with extra data, and cross-
embodiment transfer across different robot platforms.
We believe OmniVLA represents a significant step toward
broadly generalizable navigation policies. To further advance
this direction, we will release our models and training code
as a resource for developing scalable and flexible robot
navigation models. In particular, there remains room for
improvement in language-conditioned navigation, both in
goal-reaching and instruction-following. Progress in this area
will benefit greatly from larger and more carefully curated
datasets, which we hope the community will pursue.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by Berkeley AI Research at
the University of California, Berkeley and Toyota Motor
North America. And, this work was partially support by
ARL DCIST CRA W911NF-17-2-0181 and the NSF under
IIS-2150826. We thank Kyle Stachowicz and Satoshi Koide
for discussing the model architecture and its implementation
to train our OmniVLA. And we thank Frodobots AI for
providing robot hardware for our evaluations.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Lin, H. Yin, W. Ping, P. Molchanov, M. Shoeybi, and S. Han, “Vila:
On pre-training for visual language models,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2024, pp. 26 689–26 699.
[2] M. Deitke, C. Clark, S. Lee, R. Tripathi, Y. Yang, J. S. Park, M. Salehi,
N. Muennighoff, K. Lo, L. Soldaini, et al., “Molmo and pixmo: Open
weights and open data for state-of-the-art vision-language models,”
in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference, 2025, pp. 91–104.
[3] M. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair,
R. Rafailov, E. Foster, G. Lam, P. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Kollar,
B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, D. Sadigh, S. Levine, P. Liang, and
C. Finn, “Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
[4] S. Karamcheti, K. McKinzie, T. Huang, S. Gong, K. Fang, K. Lin,
A. Li, B. Lee, F. Ma, A. Mandlekar, et al., “Prismatic VLMs: Investi-
gating the design space of visually-conditioned language models,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 235.
PMLR,
2024, pp. 23 123–23 144.
[5] A. O’Neill, A. Rehman, A. Maddukuri, A. Gupta, A. Padalkar,
A. Lee, A. Pooley, A. Gupta, A. Mandlekar, A. Jain, et al., “Open
x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models: Open x-
embodiment collaboration 0,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 6892–6903.
[6] D. Shah, A. Sridhar, A. Bhorkar, N. Hirose, and S. Levine, “Gnm:
A general navigation model to drive any robot,” in 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
2023, pp. 7226–7233.
[7] N. Hirose, D. Shah, A. Sridhar, and S. Levine, “Exaug: Robot-
conditioned navigation policies via geometric experience augmenta-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07450, 2022.
[8] D. Shah, A. Sridhar, N. Dashora, K. Stachowicz, K. Black, N. Hirose,
and S. Levine, “Vint: A foundation model for visual navigation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.14846, 2023.
[9] A. Sridhar, D. Shah, C. Glossop, and S. Levine, “Nomad: Goal
masked diffusion policies for navigation and exploration,” in 2024
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 63–70.
[10] D. Shah and S. Levine, “Viking: Vision-based kilometer-scale naviga-
tion with geographic hints,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11271, 2022.
[11] N. Hirose, L. Ignatova, K. Stachowicz, C. Glossop, S. Levine, and
D. Shah, “Learning to drive anywhere with model-based reannotation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05592, 2025.
[12] S. Y. Gadre, M. Wortsman, G. Ilharco, L. Schmidt, and S. Song, “Cows
on pasture: Baselines and benchmarks for language-driven zero-shot
object navigation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 23 171–23 181.


[13] N. Hirose, C. Glossop, A. Sridhar, D. Shah, O. Mees, and S. Levine,
“Lelan: Learning a language-conditioned navigation policy from in-
the-wild videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03603, 2024.
[14] C. Glossop, W. Chen, A. Bhorkar, D. Shah, and S. Levine,
“Cast: Counterfactual labels improve instruction following in vision-
language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.13446, 2025.
[15] A.-C. Cheng, Y. Ji, Z. Yang, Z. Gongye, X. Zou, J. Kautz, E. Bıyık,
H. Yin, S. Liu, and X. Wang, “Navila: Legged robot vision-language-
action model for navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04453, 2024.
[16] J. Gu, E. Stefani, Q. Wu, J. Thomason, and X. E. Wang, “Vision-
and-language navigation: A survey of tasks, methods, and future
directions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12667, 2022.
[17] D. Shah, B. Osi´nski, S. Levine, et al., “Lm-nav: Robotic navigation
with large pre-trained models of language, vision, and action,” in
Conference on robot learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 492–504.
[18] O. Mees, L. Hermann, and W. Burgard, “What matters in language
conditioned robotic imitation learning over unstructured data,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 11 205–11 212,
2022.
[19] A. J. Sathyamoorthy, K. Weerakoon, M. Elnoor, A. Zore, B. Ichter,
F. Xia, J. Tan, W. Yu, and D. Manocha, “Convoi: Context-aware
navigation using vision language models in outdoor and indoor
environments,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.
15637
[20] Z. Xu, H.-T. L. Chiang, Z. Fu, M. G. Jacob, T. Zhang, T.-W. E.
Lee, W. Yu, C. Schenck, D. Rendleman, D. Shah, et al., “Mobility
vla: Multimodal instruction navigation with long-context vlms and
topological graphs,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
2024.
[21] S. Reed, K. Zolna, E. Parisotto, S. G. Colmenarejo, A. Novikov,
G. Barth-Maron, M. Gimenez, Y. Sulsky, J. Kay, J. T. Springenberg,
et al., “A generalist agent,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
[22] D. Driess, F. Xia, M. S. Sajjadi, C. Lynch, A. Chowdhery, B. Ichter,
A. Wahid, J. Tompson, Q. Vuong, T. Yu, et al., “Palm-e: an embodied
multimodal language model,” in Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2023, pp. 8469–8488.
[23] O. M. Team, D. Ghosh, H. Walke, K. Pertsch, K. Black, O. Mees,
S. Dasari, J. Hejna, T. Kreiman, C. Xu, et al., “Octo: An open-source
generalist robot policy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213, 2024.
[24] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn,
N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, et al., “π0: A vision-
language-action flow model for general robot control,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.
[25] C.
Lynch,
M.
Khansari,
T.
Xiao,
V.
Kumar,
J.
Tompson,
S. Levine, and P. Sermanet, “Learning latent plans from play,”
Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.01973
[26] R. Doshi, H. Walke, O. Mees, S. Dasari, and S. Levine, “Scaling
cross-embodied learning: One policy for manipulation, navigation,
locomotion and aviation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11812, 2024.
[27] V. Myers, A. He, K. Fang, H. Walke, P. Hansen-Estruch, C.-A.
Cheng, M. Jalobeanu, A. Kolobov, A. Dragan, and S. Levine, “Goal
representations for instruction following: A semi-supervised language
interface to control,” 2023.
[28] FrodoBots,
“Frodobots-2k,”
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://
huggingface.co/datasets/frodobots/FrodoBots-2K
[29] H. Xu, Y. Gao, F. Yu, and T. Darrell, “End-to-end learning of driving
models from large-scale video datasets,” in The IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
[30] M. J. Kim, C. Finn, and P. Liang, “Fine-tuning vision-language-
action models: Optimizing speed and success,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.19645, 2025.
[31] N. Savinov, A. Dosovitskiy, and V. Koltun, “Semi-parametric topolog-
ical memory for navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00653, 2018.
[32] N. Hirose, F. Xia, R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın, A. Sadeghian, and S. Savarese,
“Deep visual mpc-policy learning for navigation,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 3184–3191, 2019.
[33] “EarthRover
Zero,”
https://shop.frodobots.com/collections/
earth-rovers/products/earthroverzero, Accessed: 2025-09-15.
[34] T. Niwa, S. Taguchi, and N. Hirose, “Spatio-temporal graph lo-
calization networks for image-based navigation,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 3279–3286.
[35] “Go1,” https://shop.unitree.com/products/, Accessed: 2025-09-15.
[36] M. Minderer, A. Gritsenko, A. Stone, M. Neumann, D. Weissenborn,
A. Dosovitskiy, A. Mahendran, A. Arnab, M. Dehghani, Z. Shen, et al.,
“Simple open-vocabulary object detection,” in European Conference
on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2022, pp. 728–755.
[37] N. Hirose and K. Tahara, “Depth360: Self-supervised learning for
monocular depth estimation using learnable camera distortion model,”
in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 317–324.
[38] S.
Belkhale
and
D.
Sadigh,
“Minivla:
A
better
vla
with
a
smaller footprint,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
Stanford-ILIAD/openvla-mini
[39] M. Shukor, D. Aubakirova, F. Capuano, P. Kooijmans, S. Palma,
A. Zouitine, M. Aractingi, C. Pascal, M. Russi, A. Marafioti, et al.,
“Smolvla: A vision-language-action model for affordable and efficient
robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01844, 2025.
[40] D. Shah, B. Eysenbach, G. Kahn, N. Rhinehart, and S. Levine, “Rapid
exploration for open-world navigation with latent goal models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.05859, 2021.
[41] G. Kahn, A. Villaflor, B. Ding, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Self-
supervised deep reinforcement learning with generalized computation
graphs for robot navigation,” in 2018 IEEE international conference
on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 5129–5136.
[42] S. Triest, M. Sivaprakasam, S. J. Wang, W. Wang, A. M. Johnson, and
S. Scherer, “Tartandrive: A large-scale dataset for learning off-road
dynamics models,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 2546–2552.
[43] A. Shaban, X. Meng, J. Lee, B. Boots, and D. Fox, “Semantic terrain
classification for off-road autonomous driving,” in Conference on
Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2022, pp. 619–629.
[44] H. Karnan, A. Nair, X. Xiao, G. Warnell, S. Pirk, A. Toshev, J. Hart,
J. Biswas, and P. Stone, “Socially compliant navigation dataset (scand):
A large-scale dataset of demonstrations for social navigation,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 11 807–11 814,
2022.
[45] N. Hirose, D. Shah, A. Sridhar, and S. Levine, “Sacson: Scalable
autonomous control for social navigation,” IEEE Robotics and Au-
tomation Letters, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 49–56, 2023.
[46] N. Hirose, A. Sadeghian, M. V´azquez, P. Goebel, and S. Savarese,
“Gonet: A semi-supervised deep learning approach for traversability
estimation,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent
robots and systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 3044–3051.
APPENDIX
A. OmniVLA-edge based on vision-based navigation policies
In addition to our VLA-based architecture, we design
another network, OmniVLA-edge (Fig.7), based on prior
single-modality vision-based navigation policies such as
ViNT[8], NoMaD [9], MBRA [11], and LeLaN [13]. Build-
ing on ViNT for egocentric goal image-conditioned naviga-
tion, we add a projector for 2D goal-pose conditioning and
ResNet and CLIP networks with FiLM for language prompt
conditioning [13, 26]. Similar to the VLA-based model, we
design an attention mask according to the selected modality
tm during data sampling. Unlike the VLA-based network,
this model employs early fusion, conditioning tokens on
each modality before feeding them into the transformer.
To maintain temporal consistency with a lightweight ar-
chitecture, we feed tokens from the last M = 5 image
steps. Following NoMaD [9], we compute the mean of the
transformer-generated tokens and pass them to the action
head to produce actions {ˆai}i=1...N. Pre-trained weights are
used for the EfficientNet-B0, ResNet, and CLIP elements as
shown in Fig. 7.
B. Reannotation model for BDD-V dataset
BDD-V [29] consists of observations captured by a smart-
phone mounted on a car dashboard, paired with GPS sig-
nals used as actions in the original paper. Compared to


Transformer
Ego. current
EfficientNet- 
…
Image history (M images)
…
Proj.
2D Goal 
pose
Current
Res
Net
image
Language
CLIP
prompt
FiLM
B0 
EfficientNet- 
B0 
EfficientNet- 
B0 
…
Averaging  & Action head
…
N steps actions 
Sate. current 
EfficientNet- 
B0 
& goal image
& goal image
: Optional for capa-
-bility evaluation
Fig. 7: Network architecture of OmniVLA-edge based on the
vision-based navigation policies.
other datasets, BDD-V is larger and covers more diverse
environments. However, directly using GPS-based actions
for training is challenging: they are imprecise due to GPS
uncertainty, collected at 1 Hz (vs. 3 Hz for other datasets),
and the vehicle speed is about 40 times faster than the mobile
robots used in other datasets (0.5 m/s).
To address this embodiment gap, we adapt the reannotation
approach in [11] and train a version of the MBRA model
to generate feasible trajectories for our target robots. The
original MBRA penalizes virtual collisions using estimated
3D points, but BDD-V images often include the dashboard,
whose appearance varies with camera pose and can cause
false collisions, trapping the model. We resolve this by
training MBRA on a combination of GNM and BDD-V,
applying the collision-avoidance objective only to GNM.
This allows the model to implicitly learn collision avoidance
from GNM while adapting to BDD-V’s visual distribution.
Additionally, we constrain linear and angular velocities to
0.0–0.5 m/s and ±1.0 rad/s, and enforce the kinematic model
of a coaxial two-axle robot, ensuring generated trajectories
are consistent with other datasets.
C. Pre-trained checkpoints and backbones for the VLAs
Table VI lists the language and visual backbones for
versions of OmniVLA and several VLA baselines. These
models span a range of sizes and architectures, allowing us to
evaluate how pre-trained models contribute prior knowledge
to learning OmniVLA. Further details on the pre-trained
checkpoints and backbones are in the original papers.
Model name
Language backbone
Visual backbone
Model size
SmolVLA [39]
SmolLM2
SigLIP
500M
MiniVLA [38]
Qwen2.5-0.5B
DINOv2+SigLIP
1.0B
CounterfactualVLA [14]
Gemma-2B
SigLIP
2.9B
OmniVLA-edge
CLIP
EfficientNet-B0
50M
OmniVLA
Llama2-7B
DINOv2+SigLIP
7.5B
TABLE VI: We compare two variants of OmniVLA with VLA
baselines: the Gemma-based CounterfactualVLA and the omni-
modal conditioning recipe applied to SmolVLA and MiniVLA.
D. Breakdown of GNM and LeLaN dataset mixture
The GNM mixture in Table I comprises seven publicly
available datasets—RECON [40], CoryHall [41], Tartan-
Drive [42], Seattle [43], SCAND [44], SACSoN [45], and
GO Stanford 4 [32]—combined as in [6]. Using the curated
expert actions as both action commands and 2D goal poses,
OmniVLA learns policies conditioned on egocentric images,
2D poses, or their combinations.
LeLaN [13] provides synthetic action labels, language
prompts, and object poses from SACSoN, GO Stanford 2 &
4 [32, 46], HumanWalk, and YouTube videos. We leverage
these annotations to train OmniVLA for language grounding.
E. Objective design
Following [13], we introduce the additional objectives Jobj
and Jsm in addition to the main objective Jil and train our
OmniVLA policy, πθ to minimize the entire J.
min
θ
J := Jil + mobjJobj + Jsm,
(1)
Jobj is designed as (pobj −ˆaN)2 to encourage the policy
to generate actions that move toward the target object pose
pobj in language-conditioned navigation. Following [13], we
penalize the N-th action ˆaN to be close to pobj. Since Jobj is
only for the LeLaN dataset to learn language grounding, we
set mobj = 1 for the LeLaN dataset, otherwise mobj = 0 to
mask out Jobj. In addition, Jsm =
1
N−1
PN−1
i=1 (ˆai+1−ˆai)2 is
the objective to minimize the action deltas for regularization.
