REVERIE: Remote Embodied Visual Referring Expression in
Real Indoor Environments
Yuankai Qi1, Qi Wu∗1, Peter Anderson2, Xin Wang3, William Yang Wang3, Chunhua Shen1, and Anton
van den Hengel1
1Australia Centre for Robotic Vision, The University of Adelaide
2Georgia Institute of Technology
3University of California, Santa Barbara
Abstract
One of the long-term challenges of robotics is to enable
robots to interact with humans in the visual world via natu-
ral language, as humans are visual animals that commu-
nicate through language. Overcoming this challenge re-
quires the ability to perform a wide variety of complex tasks
in response to multifarious instructions from humans. In
the hope that it might drive progress towards more ﬂexible
and powerful human interactions with robots, we propose
a dataset of varied and complex robot tasks, described in
natural language, in terms of objects visible in a large set
of real images. Given an instruction, success requires nav-
igating through a previously-unseen environment to iden-
tify an object. This represents a practical challenge, but
one that closely reﬂects one of the core visual problems in
robotics. Several state-of-the-art vision-and-language nav-
igation, and referring-expression models are tested to verify
the difﬁculty of this new task, but none of them show promis-
ing results because there are many fundamental differences
between our task and previous ones. A novel Interactive
Navigator-Pointer model is also proposed that provides a
strong baseline on the task. The proposed model especially
achieves the best performance on the unseen test split, but
still leaves substantial room for improvement compared to
the human performance.
1. Introduction
You can ask a 10-year-old child to bring you a cushion,
and there is a good chance that they will succeed (even in an
unfamiliar environment), while the probability that a robot
will achieve the same task is signiﬁcantly lower. Children
∗corresponding author; qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au
Instruction: Bring me the bottom picture that is next to the 
top of stairs on level one.
Target Object
Midway
Starting Viewpoint
Figure 1. REVERIE task: an agent is given a natural language
instruction referring to a remote object (here in the red bounding
box) in a photo-realistic 3D environment. The agent must navigate
to an appropriate location and identify the object from multiple
distracting candidates. The blue discs indicate nearby navigable
viewpoints provided by the simulator.
have a wealth of knowledge learned from similar environ-
ments that they can easily apply to such tasks in an unfamil-
iar environment, including the facts that cushions generally
inhabit couches, that couches inhabit lounge rooms, and that
lounge rooms are often connected to the rest of a building
through hallways. Children are also able to interpret natu-
ral language instructions and associate them with the visual
world. However, the fact that robots currently lack these
capabilities dramatically limits their domain of application.
1
arXiv:1904.10151v2  [cs.CV]  6 Jan 2020


1. Fold the towel in the bathroom with the ﬁshing theme.
2. Enter the bedroom with the letter E over the bed and turn the light switch off.
3. Go to the blue family room and bring the framed picture of a person on a horse at the top left corner above the TV.
4. Push in the bar chair, in the kitchen, by the oven.
5. Windex the mirror above the sink, in the bedroom with the large, stone ﬁreplace.
6. Could you please dust the light above the toilet in the bathroom that is near the entry way?
7. At the top of the stairs, the ﬁrst set of potted ﬂowers in front of the stairs need to be dusted off.
8. To the right at the end of the hall, where the large blue table foot stool is, there is a mirror that needs to be wiped.
9. Go to the hallway area where there are three pictures side by side and get me the one on the right.
10. There is a bottle in the ofﬁce alcove next to the piano. It is on the shelf above the sink on the extreme right. Please bring it here.
Table 1. Indicative instruction examples from the REVERIE dataset illustrating various interesting linguistic phenomena such as dangling
modiﬁers (e.g. 1), spatial relations (e.g. 3), imperatives (e.g. 9), co-references (e.g. 10), etc. Note that the agent in our task is required to
identify the referent object, but is not required to complete any manipulation tasks (such as folding the towel).
Therefore, to equip robots with such abilities and to ad-
vance real-world vision-and-language research, we intro-
duce a new problem, which we refer to as Remote Embodied
Visual referring Expression in Real Indoor Environments —
REVERIE. An example of the REVERIE task is illustrated
in Fig. 1. A robot spawns at a starting location and is given
a natural language instruction that refers to a remote target
object at another location within the same building. To carry
out the task, the agent is required to navigate closer to the
object and return a bounding box encompassing the target
object speciﬁed by the instruction. It demands the robot to
infer the probable location of the object using knowledge of
the environments, and explicitly identify the object accord-
ing to the language instruction.
In distinction to other embodied tasks such as Vision-
and-Language Navigation (VLN) [1] and Embodied Ques-
tion Answering (EQA) [7], REVEVIE evaluates the suc-
cess based on explicit object grounding rather than the
point navigation in VLN or the question answering in EQA.
This more clearly reﬂects the necessity of robots’ capability
of natural language understanding, visual navigation, and
object grounding. More importantly, the concise instruc-
tions in REVERIE represent more practical tasks that hu-
mans would ask a robot to perform (see Tab. 1). Those
high-level instructions are fundamentally different from the
ﬁne-grained visuomotor instructions in VLN, and would
empower high-level reasoning and real-world applications.
Moreover, compared to the task of Referring Expression
(RefExp) [14, 22] that selects the desired object from a sin-
gle image, REVERIE is far more challenging in the sense
that the target object is not visible in the initial view and
needs to be discovered by actively navigating in the envi-
ronment. Hence, in REVERIE, there are at least an order
of magnitude more object candidates to choose from than
RefExp.
We build the REVERIE dataset upon the Matterport3D
Simulator [1, 4], which provides panoramas of all the nav-
igable locations and the connectivity graph in a build-
ing.
To provide object-level information of the environ-
ments, we have extended the simulator to incorporate ob-
ject annotations, including labels and bounding boxes from
Chang et al. [4]. The extended simulator can project bound-
ing boxes onto images of different viewpoints and angles,
thus able to accommodate evaluation on every possible lo-
cation. The REVERIE dataset comprises 10,567 panora-
mas within 90 buildings containing 4,140 target objects, and
21,702 crowd-sourced instructions with an average length
of 18 words. Tab. 1 demonstrates sample instructions from
the dataset, which illustrate various linguistic phenomena,
including spatial relations, multiple long and dangling mod-
iﬁers, and coreferences, etc.
We investigate the difﬁculty of the REVERIE task by di-
rectly combining state-of-the-art (SoTA) navigation meth-
ods and referring expression methods, and none of them
shows promising results. We then propose an Interactive
Navigator-Pointer model serving as a strong baseline for the
REVERIE task. We also provide the human performance of
the REVERIE task on the test set to quantify the machine-
human gap.
In summary, our main contributions are:
1. A new embodied vision-and-language problem, Re-
mote Embodied Visual referring Expressions in Real
3D Indoor Environments (REVERIE), where given a
natural language instruction that represents a practical
task to perform, an agent must navigate and identify a
remote object in real indoor environments.
2. The ﬁrst benchmark dataset for the REVERIE task,
which contains large-scale human-annotated instruc-
tions and extends the Matterport3D Simulator [1] with
additional object annotations.
3. A novel interactive navigator-pointer model that pro-
vides strong baselines for the REVERIE dataset under
several evaluation metrics.
2. Related Work
Referring Expression Comprehension.
The referring
expression comprehension task requires an agent to localise


Dataset
Language Context
Visual Context
Goal
Human
Main Content
Unamb
Guidance Level
BBox
Real-world
Temporal
EQA [7], IQA [10]

QA-pair

–


Dynamic
QA
MARCO [21], DRIF [3]

Nav-Instruction

Detailed


Dynamic
Navigation
R2R [1]

Nav-Instruction

Detailed


Dynamic
Navigation
TouchDown [5]

Nav-Instruction

Detailed


Dynamic
Navigation
VLNA [24], HANNA[23]

Nav-Dialog

High


Dynamic
Find Object
TtW [8]

Nav-Dialog

High


Dynamic
Navigation
CVDN [25]

Nav-Dialog

High


Dynamic
Find Room
ReferCOCO [30]

RefExp

–


Static
Localise Object
REVERIE

Remote RefExp

High


Dynamic
Localise Remote Object
Table 2. Compared to existing datasets involving embodied vision and language tasks. Symbol instruction: ‘QA’: ‘Question-Answer’,
‘Unamb’: ‘Unambiguous’, ‘BBox’: ‘Bounding Box’, ‘Dynamic’/‘Static’: visual context temporally changed or not.
an object in an image given a natural language expression.
Recent work casts this task as looking for the object that
can generate its paired expressions [13, 18, 30] or jointly
embedding the image and expression for matching estima-
tion [6, 12, 16, 29]. Yu et al. [30] propose to compute the
appearance difference of the same category objects to en-
hance the visual features for expression generation. Instead
of treating each expression as a unit, [29] learns to decom-
pose an expression into appearance, location, and object re-
lationship three components.
Different from referring expression, REVERIE intro-
duces three new challenges: i) The refereed object is not
visible in the initial scene and only can be accessed after
navigating to a closed location. ii) In contrast to previous
referring expression tasks that select the target object from
a single image, object candidates in REVERIE come from
panoramas of all the possible viewpoints. iii) The objects in
referring expression are normally captured from the front
view, while in our setting, the visual appearances of ob-
jects may vary largely due to different observation angles
and viewpoints.
Vision-and-Language Navigation.
Vision-and-language
navigation (VLN) is the task where an agent is to navigate
to a goal location in a 3D simulator given detailed natural
language instructions such as “Turn right and go through
the kitchen. Walk past the couches on the right and into the
hallway on the left. Go straight until you get to a room that
is to the left of the pictures of children on the wall. Turn left
and go into the bathroom. Wait near the sink.” [1]. A range
of VLN methods [9, 15, 19, 20, 27, 28] have been proposed
to address this VLN task.
Although the proposed REVERIE task also requires an
agent to navigate to a goal location, it differs from exist-
ing VLN tasks in two important aspects: i) The challenge
is much more closely related to the overarching objective of
enabling natural language robot tasking because the goal
is to localise a target object speciﬁed in an instruction, not
just a location. This removes the artiﬁcial constraint that
the instruction is restricted to solely to navigation, and re-
ﬂects the reality of the fact that most objects can be seen
from multiple viewpoints. ii) Our collected navigation in-
structions are semantic-level commands which better reﬂect
the way humans communicate. They are thus closer to ‘the
cold tap in the ﬁrst bedroom on level two’ rather than step
by step navigation instructions such as ‘go to the top of the
stairs then turn left and walk along the hallway and stop at
the ﬁrst bedroom on your right’.
The most closely related challenge to that proposed here
is that addressed in [23, 24, 25] whereby an agent must
identify an object by requesting and interpreting natural lan-
guage assistance. The instructions are of the form ‘Find a
mug’, and the assumption is that there is an oracle following
the agent around the environment willing to provide natural
language assistance. The question is then whether the agent
can effectively exploit the assistance provided by the om-
niscient oracle. REVERIE, in contrast, evaluates whether
the agent can carry out a natural-language instruction alone.
Another closely related work is TOUCHDOWN [5], that re-
quires an agent to ﬁnd a location in an urban outdoor envi-
ronment on the basis of detailed navigation instructions.
Embodied Question Answering.
Embodied question an-
swering (EQA) [7] requires an agent to answer a question
about an object or a room in a synthetic environment. Gor-
don et al. [10] introduce an interactive version of the EQA
task, where the agent may need to interact with the environ-
ment/objects to correctly answer questions. Our REVERIE
task differs from previous works that only output a simple
answer or a series of actions, as we ask the agent to output
a bounding box around a target object. This is a more chal-
lenging but realistic setting because if we want a robot to
carry out a task that relates to an object, we need its precise
location. Tab. 2 displays the difference between our task
and other related embodied vision-language tasks.
3. The REVERIE Dataset
We now describe the REVERIE task and dataset, includ-
ing the task deﬁnition, evaluation metrics, simulator, data
collection policy, and analysis of the collected instructions.


3.1. The REVERIE Task
As shown in Fig. 1, our REVERIE task requires an in-
telligent agent to correctly localise a remote target object
(can not be observed at starting location) speciﬁed by a con-
cise high-level natural language instruction (see samples in
Tab. 1). It is worth noting that our instructions are much
closer to practical scenarios in daily life than the detailed
instructions in VLN [1], because the latter ones are so com-
plex and long that are unrealistic for human to command
robots. Since the target object is in a different room from
the starting one, the agent needs ﬁrst to navigate to the goal
location.
Formally, at the beginning of each episode, the agent
is given as input a high-level natural language instruction
X = ⟨w1, w2, · · · , wL⟩, where L is the length of the in-
struction and wi is a single word token. Following the com-
mon practice in VLN, the agent has access to surrounding
panoramic images V0 = {v0,k, k ∈1, . . . , 36} and naviga-
ble viewpoints at the current location, where v0,k is deter-
mined by the agent’s states comprising a tuple of 3D posi-
tion, heading and elevation s0,k = ⟨p0, φ0,k, θ0,k⟩(3 eleva-
tion and 12 heading angles are used). Then the agent needs
to make a sequence of actions ⟨a0, · · · , aT ⟩to reach the
goal location, where each action is choosing one of the nav-
igable viewpoints or choosing the current viewpoint which
means to stop. The action can also be a ‘detecting’ action
that outputs the target object bounding-box refereed by the
instruction. It is worth noting that the agent can attempt
to localise the target at any step, which is totally up to al-
gorithm design. But we only allow the agent output once
in each episode, which means the agent only can guess the
answer once in a single run. If the agent ‘thinks’ it has lo-
calised the target object and decides to output it, it is re-
quired to output a bounding box or choose from several
candidates provided by the simulator. A bounding box is
denoted as ⟨bx, by, bw, bh⟩, where bx and by are the coordi-
nate of the left-top point, bw and bh denote the width and
height of the bounding box, respectively. The episode ends
after the agent outputs the target bounding box.
3.2. Evaluation Metrics
The performance of a model is mainly measured by
REVERIE success rate, which is the number of success-
ful tasks over the total number of tasks. A task is consid-
ered successful if it selects the correct bounding box of the
target object from a set of candidates (or the IoU between
the predicted bounding box and the ground-truth bounding
box ≥0.5, when candidate objects bounding boxes are not
given). Because the target object can be observed at dif-
ferent viewpoints or camera views, we treat it as a success
as long as the agent can identify the target within 3 me-
ters, regardless of from different viewpoints or views. We
also measure the navigation performance with four kinds
Figure 2. Object bounding boxes (BBox) in our simulator. The
BBox size and aspect ratio of the same object may change after
the agent moves to another viewpoint or changes its camera view.
of metrics, including success rate, oracle success rate, suc-
cess rate weighted by path length (SPL), and path length
(in meters) [1]. Please note that in our task, a navigation is
considered successful only when the agent stops at a loca-
tion within 3 meters from the target object. More details of
evaluation metrics can be found in supplementary materials.
3.3. The REVERIE Simulator
Our simulator is based on the Matterport3D Simula-
tor [1], a large-scale interactive environment constructed
from the Matterport3D dataset [4]. In the simulator, an em-
bodied agent is able to virtually ‘move’ throughout each
building by iteratively selecting adjacent nodes from the
graph of panoramic viewpoints and adjusting the camera
pose at each viewpoint. At each viewpoint, it returns a ren-
dered colour image that captures the current view, as shown
in Fig. 1.
Adding
Object-level
Annotations.
Object
bounding
boxes are needed in our proposed task, which are either
provided as object hypotheses or used to assess the agent’s
ability to localise the object that is referred to by a natural
expression. The main challenge of adding the object bound-
ing boxes into the simulator is that we need to handle the
changes in visibility and coordinate of 2D bounding boxes
as the camera moves or rotates.
To address these issues, we calculate the overlap between
bounding boxes and object depth in each view. If a bound-
ing box is fully covered by another one and it has a larger
depth, we treat it as an occluded case. Speciﬁcally, for each
building the Matterport3D dataset provides all the objects
appearing in it with centre point position c = ⟨cx, cy, cz⟩,
three axis directions di = ⟨dx
i , dy
i , dz
i ⟩, i ∈{1, 2, 3}, and
three radii ri, one for each axis direction. To correctly ren-
der objects in the web simulator, we ﬁrst calculate the eight
vertexes using c, di and ri. Then these vertexes are pro-
jected into the camera space by the camera pose provided
by Matterport3D dataset. Both C++ and web simulators
will be released with the code. Fig. 2 presents an exam-


5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Number of Words in An Instruction
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Nomalized Frequency of Instructions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Number of Objects in An Instruction
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Normalized Frequency of Instructions
Figure 3. The distribution of the number of words (left) and objects
(right) in each instruction.
ple of projected bounding boxes. Note that the target object
may be observed at multiple viewpoints in one room, but we
expect a robot can reach the target in a short distance. Thus,
we only preserve objects within three meters to a viewpoint.
For each object, a class label and a bounding box are asso-
ciated. But it is worth noting that we adjust the size and
aspect-ratio accordingly as the viewpoint and camera angle
change. In total, we obtain 20k object annotations.
3.4. Data Collection
Our goal is to collect high-level human daily commands
that may be assigned to a home robot in future, such as
‘Open the left window in the kitchen’ or ‘Go to my bed-
room and bring me a pillow’. We develop an interactive 3D
WebGL simulator to collect such instructions on Amazon
Mechanical Turk (AMT). The web simulator ﬁrst shows a
path animation and then randomly highlights one object at
the goal location for workers to provide instructions to ﬁnd
or operate with. There is no style limitation of the command
as long as it can lead the robot to the target object. Assistant
room and object information are provided to workers facili-
tating them to provide unambiguous instructions if there are
similar rooms or objects. The workers can look around at
the goal location to learn the environment. For each target
object, we collect three referring expressions. The full col-
lection interface (see in supplementary) is the result of sev-
eral rounds of experimentation. Over 1,000 workers took
part in the data collection, totally contributing around 2,648
hours of annotation time. Examples of the collected data
can be found in Tab. 1, and more are in supplementary.
3.5. Dataset Analysis
The REVERIE dataset contains totally 21,702 instruc-
tions and a vocabulary of over 1,600 words. The average
length of collected instructions is 18 words involving both
navigation and referring expression information. Consid-
ering the detailed navigation instructions provided in the
R2R [1] with an average length of 29 words and the previ-
ous largest dataset RefCOCOg [30] contains an average of
8 words, our instructions command is much more concise
and natural, and thus more challenging.
Fig. 3 (left) displays the length distribution of the col-
lected instructions, which shows that most instructions have
10 ∼22 words while the shortest annotation could be only
Figure 4. Word cloud of instructions (left) and target objects (right)
in the REVERIE dataset. The bigger the font, the more percentage
it occupies.
3 words, such as ‘Flush the toilet’. Fig. 4 (left) presents the
relative amount of words used in instructions in the form of
word cloud. It shows that people prefer ‘go’ for navigation,
and most instructions involve ‘bathroom’. We also compute
the number of mentioned objects in instructions and its dis-
tribution is presented in Fig. 3 (right). It shows that 56%
instructions mention 3 or more objects, 28% instructions
mention 2 objects, and the remaining 15% instructions men-
tion 1 object. On average, there are 7 objects with 50 bound-
ing boxes at each target viewpoint. There are 4,140 target
objects in the dataset, falling into 489 categories, which are
6 times more than the 80 categories in ReferCOCO [30], a
most popular referring expression dataset at present. Fig. 4
(right) shows the relative amount of target objects in differ-
ent categories.
Data Splits
We follow the same train/val/test split strat-
egy as the R2R [1] datasets. The training set consists of 59
scenes and 10,466 instructions over 2,353 objects. The val-
idation set including seen and unseen splits totally contains
63 scenes, 953 objects, and 4,944 instructions, of which 10
scenes and 3,573 instructions over 525 objects are reserved
for val unseen split. For the test set, we collect 6,292 in-
structions involving 834 objects randomly scattered in 16
scenes. All the test data are unseen during training and vali-
dation procedures. The ground truth for the test set will not
be released, and we will host an evaluation server where
agent trajectories and detected bounding boxes can be up-
loaded for scoring.
4. The Interactive Navigator-Pointer Model
As our REVERIE task requires an agent to navigate to
the goal location and point out the target object, a naive so-
lution is to employ state-of-the-art navigation (as a naviga-
tor) and referring expression comprehension (as a pointer)
methods jointly. However, it is of great importance how
the navigator and pointer should work together. Ideally, we
want the navigator and pointer to beneﬁt each other. Here,
we propose a simple yet effective interactive manner that
achieves the best performance as a strong baseline. Specif-
ically, our module includes three parts: a navigator module
that decides the action to take for the next step, a pointer
module that attempts to localise the target object according
to the language guidance, and an interaction module that


Bring me the bottom picture that is next to the top 
of stairs on level one.
Sub 
Matching
Loc
Matching
Rel
Matching
Sub 
Module
Loc
Module
Rel
Module
Weighted Sum
Top 3
Vis:
Label:
Bi_LSTM
Picture Picture Picture
𝒉𝒉𝑡𝑡−1
Positional 
Encoding
Soft-attention
ෝ𝒙𝒙𝒕𝒕
𝒙𝒙𝑡𝑡,𝑘𝑘
𝑜𝑜
MLP
Soft-attention
𝒗𝒗𝑡𝑡,𝑘𝑘
𝒗𝒗𝑡𝑡,𝑘𝑘
𝑜𝑜
Action Selection
LSTM
= 𝒗𝒗𝑡𝑡,𝑘𝑘
′
ෝ𝒗𝒗𝑡𝑡′
𝒉𝒉𝑡𝑡
Avg.
,
,
Extract Feature
Navigable
views
Pointer
Interaction
Navigator
Figure 5. Our Interactive Navigator-Pointer Model
responses for sending the referring expression comprehen-
sion information obtained from the pointer to the navigator
to guild it to make more accurate action prediction.
4.1. The Navigator Module
The backbone of our navigator module is a ‘short’ ver-
sion of FAST [15], which uses a sequence-to-sequence
LSTM architecture with an attention mechanism and a
backtracking mechanism to increase the action accuracy.
Speciﬁcally, let X ∈RL×512 denote instruction features
obtained from X by an LSTM, and V ′ = [v′
t,1; . . . ; v′
t,K] ∈
RK×4736 denote updated visual features obtained by our in-
teractive module (Sec. 4.3) for panoramic images Vt at step
t. FAST-short learns the local logit lt signal, which is cal-
culated by a visual and textual co-grounding model adopted
from [20]. First, grounded text ˆxt = α⊤
t X and grounded
visual ˆv′
t = β⊤
t V ′ are learned by
αt = softmax(PE(X)(Wxht−1))
(1)
βt = softmax(g(V ′)(Wvht−1))
(2)
where αt ∈RL×1 is textual attention weight, βt ∈RK×1
is visual attention weight, Wx and Wv are learnable param-
eters, PE(·) is the positional encoding [26] that captures
the relative position between each word within an instruc-
tion, g(·) is a one-layer Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP),
ht−1 ∈R512×1 is previous encoder context.
The new
context is updated by an LSTM taking as input the newly
grounded text and visual features as well as previous se-
lected action
(ht, ct) = LSTM([ˆxt, ˆv′
t, at−1], (ht−1, ct−1)).
(3)
Then the logit lt can be computed via an inner-product be-
tween each candidate’s encoded context and instruction by
lt,k = (Wa[ht, ˆxt])⊤g(v′
t,k)
(4)
where Wa is a learnable parameter matrix.
Based on logit lt, FAST-short maintains one candidate
queue and one ending queue. All navigable viewpoints (in-
cluding the current viewpoint) at the current location are
pushed into the candidate queue, but only the viewpoint
with the largest accumulated logit Pt
τ=0 lτ is popped out as
the selected next step. Each passed viewpoint is pushed into
the ending queue. One episode ends if the current viewpoint
is selected or the candidate queue is empty or the maximum
step is reached. Finally, the viewpoint with the largest ac-
cumulated logits is chosen as the actual stop location.
4.2. The Pointer Module
We use MAttNet [29] as our pointer because of its
good generalisation ability. It decomposes an expression
into three modular components related to subject appear-
ance, location, and relationship to other objects via the
attention mechanism qm = PL
j=1 am,jej, where m ∈
{subj, loc, rel}, ej is the embedding of each word in the ex-
pression/instruction X. am,j is the attention on each word
for each module.
Then
three
kinds
of
matching
scores
S(oi|qm)
are
computed
for
each
object
oi
conditioned
on
each modular phrase embedding qm.
Speciﬁcally,
S(oi|qsubj) = F(˜vsubj
i
, qsubj), S(oi|qloc) = F(˜lloc
i , qloc),
and S(oi|qrel) = maxj̸=i F(˜vrel
ij , qrel), where F(·) is a
two-layer MLP, ˜vsubj
i
is a ‘in-box’ attended feature for
each object using a 14 × 14 grid. ˜lloc
i
is the location repre-
sentation of object oi obtained by a fully-connected layer
taking as input the relative position offset and area ratio to
its up to ﬁve surrounding objects of the same category. ˜vrel
ij
is the visual representation of the surrounding object oj
regardless of categories.
The ﬁnal matching score of object oi and the instruction
X is a weighted sum:


S =
X
S(oi|qm)wm
(5)
where wm = softmax(W L
m[h0, hL] + bm).
4.3. The Interaction Module
Intuitively, we want the Navigator and Pointer to interact
with each other so that both navigation and referring ex-
pression accuracy can be improved. For example, the nav-
igator can use the visual grounding information to decide
when and where to stop, and the pointer accuracy can be
improved if the navigator can reach the correct target loca-
tion. To this end, we propose an interaction module that can
plug the pointer’s output into the navigator. Speciﬁcally, we
ﬁrst perform referring expression comprehension using the
above pointer module to select the top-3 matching objects in
each candidate view. Then we use a trainable bi-direction
LSTM to encode the category labels of these selected ob-
jects XO = {Labeli∈top3}
xo
t,k = bi LSTM(XO)
(6)
as the textual representation for the k-th candidate view-
point. In addition, the averaged output of ResNet FC7 layer
of these object regions is used as the visual representation
vo
t,k. Finally, we update the candidate viewpoint feature by
concatenation
v′
t,k = [vt,k, xo
t,k, vo
t,k]
(7)
which is send to the navigator (see Equ. 2 and 4).
The
pointer in such an interaction serves as hard attention for
each candidate viewpoint, which highlights the most target-
related objects for the navigator to take into account.
4.4. Loss Functions
Our ﬁnal loss consists of two parts, the navigation loss
Lnav and referring expression loss Lexp. The Lnav is a
cross-entropy loss for action selection and a mean squared
error loss for progress monitor:
Lnav = −λ1
T
X
t=1
ya
t log(lt,k) −(1 −λ1)
T
X
t=1
(ypm
t
−ppm
t
)2
(8)
where ya
t is the ground truth action at step t, λ1 = 0.5 is
the weight balancing the two loss, ypm
t
∈[0, 1] is the nor-
malised distance in units of length from the current view-
point to the goal, ppm
t
is the predicted progress.
The referring expression loss Lexp is a ranking loss:
Lexp =
X
i
[λ2max(0, δ + S(oi|rj) −S(oi|ri))
+λ3max(0, δ + S(ok|ri) −S(oi|ri))]
(9)
where λ2 = 1.0, λ3 = 1.0, (oi, ri) is a positive (object,
expression) pair, (oi, rj) and (ok, ri) are negative (object,
expression) pairs, δ is the distance margin between posi-
tive and negative pairs. All of the losses are summarised
together:
L = Lnav + λ4Lexp
(10)
to train our Interactive Navigator-Pointer model. We set λ4
to 1.0 by default.
5. Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst present the training details of the
interactive navigator–pointer model. Then, we provide ex-
tensive evaluation and analysis.
5.1. Implementation Details
The simulator image resolution is set to 640×480 pixels
with a vertical ﬁeld of view of 60 degrees. For each instruc-
tion in the train split, images and object bounding boxes at
the goal viewpoint (for the views where the target object is
visible) are organised following the format as in MAttNet
for pointer training. With the trained pointer, assistant ob-
ject information is provided for the navigator as described
in Section 4.3 to train the navigator. The code and dataset
will be released.
5.2. REVERIE Experimental Results
We ﬁrst evaluate several baseline models and state-of-
the-art (SoTA) navigation models, combined with the Mat-
tNet, i.e., the pointer module. After the navigation models
decide to stop, the pointer module is used to predict the tar-
get object. In addition, we also test human performance
using an interactive web interface (see details in the supple-
mentary).
Below is a brief introduction of the evaluated baseline
and state-of-the-art models. There are four baseline models,
which are:
• Random exploits the characteristics of the dataset by
randomly choosing a path with random steps (maxi-
mum 10) and then randomly choose an object as the
predicted target.
• Shortest always follows the shortest path to the goal.
• R2R-TF and R2R-SF [1] are the ﬁrst batch of nav-
igation baselines, which trains a basic LSTM [11]
with attention mechanism [2]. The difference between
R2R-TF and R2R-SF is that R2R-TF is trained with
the ground truth action at each step (Teacher-Forcing,
TF) while R2R-SF adopts an action sampled from the
predicted probability over its action space (Student-
Forcing, SF).
The evaluated four SoTA navigation models are:
• SelfMonitor [20] uses a visual-textual co-grounding
module to highlight the instruction for the next action
and a progress monitor to reﬂect the progress.


Methods
Val Seen
Val UnSeen
Test (Unseen)
Navigation Acc.
REVERIE
Navigation Acc.
REVERIE
Navigation Acc.
REVERIE
Succ.
OSucc.
SPL
Length
Succ.
Succ.
OSucc.
SPL
Length
Succ.
Succ.
OSucc.
SPL
Length
Succ.
Random
2.74
8.92
1.91
11.99
1.97
1.76
11.93
1.01
10.76
0.96
2.30
8.88
1.44
10.34
1.18
Shortest
100
100
100
10.46
68.45
100
100
100
9.47
56.63
100
100
100
9.39
48.98
R2R-TF [1]
7.38
10.75
6.40
11.19
4.22
3.21
4.94
2.80
11.22
2.02
3.94
6.40
3.30
10.07
2.32
R2R-SF [1]
29.59
35.70
24.01
12.88
18.97
4.20
8.07
2.84
11.07
2.16
3.99
6.88
3.09
10.89
2.00
RCM [27]
23.33
29.44
21.82
10.70
16.23
9.29
14.23
6.97
11.98
4.89
7.84
11.68
6.67
10.60
3.67
SelfMonitor [20]
41.25
43.29
39.61
7.54
30.07
8.15
11.28
6.44
9.07
4.54
5.80
8.39
4.53
9.23
3.10
FAST-Short [15]
45.12
49.68
40.18
13.22
31.41
10.08
20.48
6.17
29.70
6.24
14.18
23.36
8.74
30.69
7.07
FAST-Lan-Only
8.36
23.61
3.67
49.43
5.97
9.37
29.76
3.65
45.03
5.00
8.15
28.45
2.88
46.19
4.34
Ours
50.53
55.17
45.50
16.35
31.97
14.40
28.20
7.19
45.28
7.84
19.88
30.63
11.61
39.05
11.28
Human
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
81.51
86.83
53.66
21.18
77.84
Table 3. REVERIE success rate achieved by combining state-of-the-art navigation methods with the RefExp method MAttNet [29].
• RCM [27] employs reinforcement learning to encour-
age global matching between instructions and trajecto-
ries, and performs cross-model grounding.
• FAST-Short [15] introduces backtracking into Self-
Monitor.
• FAST-Lan-Only employs above FAST-Short model
but we only input the language instruction without any
visual input. This model is used to check whether our
task/dataset has a bias on language input.
Results. The detailed experimental results are presented in
Tab. 3, of which the ﬁrst four rows are results for baselines,
the following four rows are for SoTA methods, and the last
two rows are for our model and human performance.
According to the baseline section in Tab. 3, the Random
model only achieves a REVERIE success around 1%, which
indicates the REVERIE task has a huge solution space. The
sequence-to-sequence baselines R2R-TF and R2R-SF [1]
achieve good results on the Val-Seen split but decrease a
lot on the unseen splits. Student-Forcing is generally better
than Teacher-Forcing. The Shortest model achieves the per-
fect performance because the ground-truth path to the goal
is directly given.
In the second part, the best REVERIE success rate is
achieved by the combination of SoTA navigation (FAST)
and referring expression (MAttNet) models.
However,
the REVERIE success rate is only 7.07% on the test
split, falling far behind human performance 77.84%. The
navigation-only accuracy of these SoTA navigation models
indicates the challenge of our navigation task. Nearly 30%
drops on the unseen splits are observed compared to the per-
formance on previous R2R [1]. For example, the navigation
SPL score of FAST-Short [15] on Val-UnSeen split drops
from 43% on the R2R dataset to 6.17% on REVERIE.
To test whether our dataset has strong language bias, i.e.,
whether a language-only model can achieve good perfor-
mance, we implement a FAST-Lan-Only model with only
instructions as its input. We observe a big drop on both
seen and unseen splits, which suggests jointly considering
language and visual information is necessary to our task.
Overall, these SoTA model results show that a simple
combination of SoTA navigation and referring expression
methods would not necessarily lead to the best performance
Val Seen
Val UnSeen
Test
Baseline
30.69
18.63
16.18
MAttNet [29]
68.45
56.63
48.98
CM-Erase [17]
65.21
54.02
45.25
Human
–
–
90.76
Table 4. Referring expression comprehension success rate (%) at
the ground truth goal viewpoint of our REVERIE dataset.
as failures from either the navigator or the pointer would
decrease the overall success. In this paper, we make the
ﬁrst attempt to enable the navigator and pointer to work in-
teractively as described in Sec. 4.3. The results in Tab. 3
show that our interactive model achieves consistently better
results than non-interactive ones. The FAST-Short can be
treated as our ablated model that without our proposed in-
teraction module. Our ﬁnal model achieves a gain of 4.2%
on the test split.
Referring Expression-Only.
We also report the Refer-
ring Expression-Only performance.
In this setting, the
agent is placed at the ground-truth target location, and then
referring expression comprehension models are tested.
We test the SoTA models such as MattNet [29] and CM-
Erase [17] as well as a simple CNN-RNN baseline model
with triplet ranking loss. Tab. 4 presents the results with hu-
man performance. It shows that the SoTA models achieve
around 50% accuracy on the test split1 which are far more
better than the results when jointly considering the naviga-
tion and referring expression shown in Tab. 3. Even though,
there is still a 40% gap to human performance, suggesting
that our proposed REVERIE task is challenging.
6. Conclusion
Enable human-robots collaboration is a long-term goal.
In this paper, we make a step further towards this goal by
proposing a Remote Embodied Visual referring Expressions
in Real Indoor Environments (REVERIE) task and dataset.
The REVERIE is the ﬁrst one to evaluate the capability of
an agent to follow high-level natural languages instructions
1These SoTA models achieve 80% accuracy on ReferCOCO [30], a
golden benchmark for referring expression.


to navigate and identify the target object in previously un-
seen real images rendered buildings. We investigate several
baselines and an interactive Navigator-Pointer agent model,
of which the performance consistently demonstrate the sig-
niﬁcant necessity of further researches in this ﬁeld.
We reach three main conclusions: First, REVERIE is in-
teresting because existing vision and language methods can
be easily plugged in. Second, the challenge of understand-
ing and executing high-level instructions is signiﬁcant. Fi-
nally, the combination of instruction navigation and refer-
ring expression comprehension is a challenging task due to
the large gap to human performance.
7. Acknowledgments
We thank Sam Bahrami and Phil Roberts for their great
help in the building of the REVERIE dataset.
References
[1] Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark
Johnson, Niko S¨underhauf, Ian D. Reid, Stephen Gould, and
Anton van den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: In-
terpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real
environments. In CVPR, pages 3674–3683, 2018. 2, 3, 4, 5,
7, 8
[2] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate. In ICLR, 2015. 7
[3] Valts Blukis, Dipendra Kumar Misra, Ross A. Knepper, and
Yoav Artzi. Mapping navigation instructions to continuous
control actions with position-visitation prediction.
In 2nd
Annual Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2018, Z¨urich,
Switzerland, 29-31 October 2018, Proceedings, pages 505–
518, 2018. 3
[4] Angel X. Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas A. Funkhouser, Ma-
ciej Halber, Matthias Nießner, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song,
Andy Zeng, and Yinda Zhang. Matterport3d: Learning from
RGB-D data in indoor environments. In 2017 International
Conference on 3D Vision, 3DV 2017, Qingdao, China, Octo-
ber 10-12, 2017, pages 667–676, 2017. 2, 4
[5] Howard Chen, Alane Suhr, Dipendra Misra, Noah Snavely,
and Yoav Artzi. Touchdown: Natural language navigation
and spatial reasoning in visual street environments. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 12538–12547, 2019. 3
[6] Kan Chen, Rama Kovvuri, and Ram Nevatia. Query-guided
regression network with context policy for phrase grounding.
In ICCV, pages 824–832, 2017. 3
[7] Abhishek Das, Samyak Datta, Georgia Gkioxari, Stefan Lee,
Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Embodied question answer-
ing. In CVPR, pages 1–10, 2018. 2, 3
[8] Harm de Vries, Kurt Shuster, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh,
Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela.
Talk the walk: Navi-
gating new york city through grounded dialogue.
CoRR,
abs/1807.03367, 2018. 3
[9] Daniel Fried, Ronghang Hu, Volkan Cirik, Anna Rohrbach,
Jacob Andreas,
Louis-Philippe Morency,
Taylor Berg-
Kirkpatrick, Kate Saenko, Dan Klein, and Trevor Darrell.
Speaker-follower models for vision-and-language naviga-
tion. In NeurIPS, pages 3318–3329, 2018. 3
[10] Daniel Gordon, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mohammad Raste-
gari, Joseph Redmon, Dieter Fox, and Ali Farhadi. IQA:
visual question answering in interactive environments.
In
CVPR, pages 4089–4098, 2018. 3
[11] Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term
memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. 7
[12] Ronghang Hu, Marcus Rohrbach, Jacob Andreas, Trevor
Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Modeling relationships in refer-
ential expressions with compositional modular networks. In
CVPR, pages 4418–4427, 2017. 3
[13] Ronghang Hu, Huazhe Xu, Marcus Rohrbach, Jiashi Feng,
Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Natural language object
retrieval. In CVPR, pages 4555–4564, 2016. 3
[14] Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and
Tamara Berg.
Referitgame: Referring to objects in pho-
tographs of natural scenes. In Proceedings of the 2014 con-
ference on empirical methods in natural language processing
(EMNLP), pages 787–798, 2014. 2
[15] Liyiming Ke, Xiujun Li, Yonatan Bisk, Ari Holtzman, Zhe
Gan, Jingjing Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, and Sid-
dhartha S. Srinivasa.
Tactical rewind: Self-correction via
backtracking in vision-and-language navigation. In CVPR,
pages 6741–6749, 2019. 3, 6, 8
[16] Jingyu Liu, Liang Wang, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Referring
expression generation and comprehension via attributes. In
ICCV, pages 4866–4874, 2017. 3
[17] Xihui Liu, Zihao Wang, Jing Shao, Xiaogang Wang, and
Hongsheng Li.
Improving referring expression grounding
with cross-modal attention-guided erasing. In CVPR, pages
1950–1959, 2019. 8
[18] Ruotian Luo and Gregory Shakhnarovich. Comprehension-
guided referring expressions. In CVPR, pages 3125–3134,
2017. 3
[19] Chih-Yao Ma, Zuxuan Wu, Ghassan AlRegib, Caiming
Xiong, and Zsolt Kira. The regretful agent: Heuristic-aided
navigation through progress estimation. In IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2019,
Long Beach, CA, USA, June 16-20, 2019, pages 6732–6740,
2019. 3
[20] Chih-Yao Ma, Jiasen Lu, Zuxuan Wu, Ghassan AlRegib,
Zsolt Kira, Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong.
Self-
monitoring navigation agent via auxiliary progress estima-
tion. In ICLR, 2019. 3, 6, 7, 8
[21] Matt MacMahon, Brian Stankiewicz, and Benjamin Kuipers.
Walk the talk: Connecting language, knowledge, and ac-
tion in route instructions.
In Proceedings, The Twenty-
First National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the
Eighteenth Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Conference, July 16-20, 2006, Boston, Massachusetts, USA,
pages 1475–1482, 2006. 3
[22] Junhua Mao, Jonathan Huang, Alexander Toshev, Oana
Camburu, Alan Yuille, and Kevin Murphy.
Generation


and comprehension of unambiguous object descriptions. In
CVPR, 2016. 2
[23] Khanh Nguyen and Hal Daum´e III.
Help, anna!
visual
navigation with natural multimodal assistance via retrospec-
tive curiosity-encouraging imitation learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.01871, 2019. 3
[24] Khanh Nguyen, Debadeepta Dey, Chris Brockett, and Bill
Dolan. Vision-based navigation with language-based assis-
tance via imitation learning with indirect intervention.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 12527–12537, 2019. 3
[25] Jesse Thomason, Michael Murray, Maya Cakmak, and
Luke Zettlemoyer.
Vision-and-dialog navigation.
CoRR,
abs/1907.04957, 2019. 3
[26] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-
reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, pages
5998–6008, 2017. 6
[27] Xin Wang, Qiuyuan Huang, Asli C¸ elikyilmaz, Jianfeng Gao,
Dinghan Shen, Yuan-Fang Wang, William Yang Wang, and
Lei Zhang.
Reinforced cross-modal matching and self-
supervised imitation learning for vision-language navigation.
CoRR, abs/1811.10092, 2018. 3, 8
[28] Xin
Wang,
Wenhan
Xiong,
Hongmin
Wang,
and
William Yang Wang.
Look before you leap:
Bridging
model-free and model-based reinforcement learning for
planned-ahead vision-and-language navigation.
In ECCV,
pages 38–55, 2018. 3
[29] Licheng Yu, Zhe Lin, Xiaohui Shen, Jimei Yang, Xin Lu,
Mohit Bansal, and Tamara L. Berg. Mattnet: Modular at-
tention network for referring expression comprehension. In
CVPR, pages 1307–1315, 2018. 3, 6, 8
[30] Licheng Yu, Patrick Poirson, Shan Yang, Alexander C. Berg,
and Tamara L. Berg. Modeling context in referring expres-
sions. In ECCV, pages 69–85, 2016. 3, 5, 8


Supplements
In this supplementary material, we provide detailed ex-
planation of evaluation metrics, examples of collected data,
data collecting tools, how human test are performed and vi-
sualisation of several REVERIE results.
1. Evaluation Metrics
• Navigation Success: a navigation is considered suc-
cessful only if the target object can be observed at the
stop viewpoint. Please note that to encourage the agent
to approach closer to the target object, we set the ob-
jects visible if they are within 3 meters away from the
current location.
• Navigation Oracle Success: a navigation is considered
oracle successful if the target object can be observed at
one of its passed viewpoints.
• Navigation SPL: it is the navigation success weighted
by the length of navigation path, which is
1
N
N
X
i=1
Si
ℓi
max(ℓi, pi)
(1)
where N is the number of tasks, Si ∈{0, 1} is a binary
indicator of success of task i, ℓi is the shortest length
between the starting viewpoint and the goal viewpoint
of task i, and pi is the path length of an agent for task
i.
• Navigation Length: trajectory length in meters.
• REVERIE Success: a task is considered REVERIE
successful if the output bounding box has an IoU (in-
tersection over union) ≥0.5 with the ground truth.
2. Typical Samples of The REVERIE Task
In Figure 1, we present several typical samples of the
proposed REVERIE task. It shows the diversity in object
category, goal region, path instruction, and target object re-
ferring expression.
3. Data Collecting Tools
To collect data for the REVERIE task, we develop a We-
bGL based data collecting tool as shown in Figure 2 and
Figure 3. To facilitate the workers, we provide real-time
updated reference information in the web page according to
the location of the agent, including the current level/total
level, the current region, and the number of regions in the
build having the same function. At the goal location, in
addition to highlighting the target object with a red 3D rect-
angle, we also provide the label of the target object and
the number of objects falling in the same category with the
target object. Text and video instructions are provided for
workers to understand how to make high quality annotations
as shown in Figure 2.
4. Human Performance Test
To obtain the machine-human performance gap, we de-
velop a WebGL based tool as shown in Figure 4 to test hu-
man performance. In the tool, we show an instruction about
a remote object to the worker. Then the worker needs to
navigate to the goal location and select one object as the
target object from a range of object candidates. The worker
can look around and go forward/backword by dragging or
clicking.
5. Visualisation of REVERIE Results
In Figure 5, we provide the visualisation of several
REVERIE results obtained by the typical state-of-the-art
method, FAST-short, and the typical baseline method, R2R-
SF.


Enter the bathroom with the red and black walls and turn on 
the sink.
Go down the hall to the bathroom of the bedroom with the 
large three section window and turn on the sink.
Go to the bathroom with black walls and clean out the sink.
Go to the office and clean the picture above the yellow stapler.
Go to the office room in the first level and bring me the 
picture to the right of the lamp.
Go to the office and clean the black and white picture of a child.
Go to the bedroom next to the bathroom on the second level 
and open the window on the left.
Move to the bedroom with the picture of a soup can and 
open the window on the far left.
Go to second level bed room with a Campbell's Tomato 
Soup picture and clean the window nearest to this picture.
Go to the bathroom with the window and the two towels and 
take the towel that isn't a hand towel.
Go to the bathroom of the beige bedroom whit an E on the 
wall and fold the towel on the right.
Go to the bathroom with a frilly white shower curtain and 
grab the towel directly across from the toilet.
Bring me the vase on the dining room table.
Go into the dining room and take the vase off the table.
Go to the dining room and take the vase.
Up the stairs in the room with the black paining on the wall 
take the left candle off the table.
Light the candle furthest from the windows in the lounge 
with green walls
Move to the lounge on level 2 with the egg sculpture and light 
the candle furthest from the windows
Figure 1. Several typical samples of the collected dataset, which involves various object category, goal region, path instruction, and object
referring expression.


Figure 2. Data collecting interface part I: instructions for AMT workers.


Figure 3. Data collecting interface Part II: assistant information and user input ﬁeld.


Figure 4. Human test interface. Workers need ﬁrst to navigate to the goal location by clicking or dragging mouse, and then identify the
target object. Only objects within 3 meters from the current location are highlighted. Different colors are used to facilitate workers to
distinguish one object from others.


Go to the bathroom with a frilly white shower curtain and clean the toilet.
Ours
Fast-short
R2R-SF
Go to the closet and bring me the pile of clothes on the left side of the shelf second from the top.
Ours
Fast-short
R2R-SF
Fast-short
Ours
R2R-SF
Goal Location
Go to the living room facing the kitchen and pull out the chair that is closer to the kitchen.
Ours
R2R-SF
Fast-short
In the bathroom with the long mirror and towels and brush resting on the tub, wipe the sink out.
Figure 5. Visualisation of several REVERIE results, including trajectories and referring expression grounding of three typical methods.
Colorized dots denote reachable locations, and different colors mark locations belonging to different regions according to the Matterport
dataset.
