Vision-and-Language Navigation:
A Survey of Tasks, Methods, and Future Directions
Jing Gu1 Eliana Stefani1
Qi Wu2
Jesse Thomason3
Xin Eric Wang1
1University of California, Santa Cruz
2The University of Adelaide
3University of Southern California
{jgu110,estefani,xwang366}@ucsc.edu
qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au, jessetho@usc.edu
Abstract
A long-term goal of AI research is to build in-
telligent agents that can communicate with hu-
mans in natural language, perceive the environ-
ment, and perform real-world tasks. Vision-
and-Language Navigation (VLN) is a funda-
mental and interdisciplinary research topic to-
wards this goal, and receives increasing atten-
tion from natural language processing, com-
puter vision, robotics, and machine learning
communities. In this paper, we review contem-
porary studies in the emerging ﬁeld of VLN,
covering tasks, evaluation metrics, methods,
etc.
Through structured analysis of current
progress and challenges, we highlight the lim-
itations of current VLN and opportunities for
future work. This paper serves as a thorough
reference for the VLN research community.1
1
Introduction
Humans communicate with each other using nat-
ural language to issue tasks and request help. An
agent that can understand human language and nav-
igate intelligently would signiﬁcantly beneﬁt hu-
man society, both personally and professionally.
Such an agent can be spoken to in natural lan-
guage, and would autonomously execute tasks such
as household chores indoors, repetitive delivery
work outdoors, or work in hazardous conditions
following human commands (bridge inspection;
ﬁre-ﬁghting). Scientiﬁcally, developing such an
agent explores how an artiﬁcial agent interprets
natural language from humans, perceives its visual
environment, and utilizes that information to navi-
gate to complete a task successfully.
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) (An-
derson et al., 2018b; Chen et al., 2019; Thoma-
son et al., 2019b) is an emerging research ﬁeld
that aims to build such an embodied agent that can
1We also release a Github repo to keep track of advances
in
VLN:
https://github.com/eric-ai-lab/
awesome-vision-language-navigation
Natural Language 
Communication
Observation
Action
Observation
Action
Agent
Oracle
Environment
Figure 1: The agent and oracle discuss the VLN task
in natural language. Both observe and interact with the
navigable environment to accomplish a task.
communicate with humans in natural language and
navigate in real 3D environments. VLN extends vi-
sual navigation in both simulated (Zhu et al., 2017;
Mirowski, 2019) and real environments (Mirowski
et al., 2018) with natural language communication.
As illustrated in Figure 1, VLN is a task that in-
volves the oracle (frequently a human), the agent,
and the environment. The agent and the oracle
communicate in natural language. The agent may
ask for guidance and the oracle could respond. The
agent navigates and interacts with the environment
to complete the task according to the instructions re-
ceived and the environment observed. Meanwhile,
the oracle observes the environment and agent sta-
tus, and may interact with the environment to help
the agent.
Since the development and release of works such
as Room-to-Room (R2R) (Anderson et al., 2018b),
many VLN datasets have been introduced. Re-
garding the degree of communication, researchers
create benchmarks where the agent is required to
passively understand one instruction before naviga-
tion, to benchmarks where agents converse with the
oracle in free-form dialog. Regarding the task ob-
jective, the requirements for the agent range from
strictly following the route described in the ini-
arXiv:2203.12667v3  [cs.CV]  3 Jun 2022


tial instruction to actively exploring the environ-
ment and interacting with objects. In a slight abuse
of terminology, we refer to benchmarks that in-
volve object interaction together with substantial
sub-problems of navigation and localization, such
as ALFRED (Shridhar et al., 2020), as VLN bench-
marks.
Many challenges exist in VLN tasks. First, VLN
faces a complex environment and requires effective
understanding and alignment of information from
different modalities. Second, VLN agents require a
reasoning strategy for the navigation process. Data
scarcity is also an obstacle. Lastly, the general-
ization of a model trained in seen environments
to unseen environments is also essential. We cat-
egorize the solutions according to the respective
challenges. (1) Representation learning methods
help understand information from different modal-
ities. (2) Action strategy learning aims to make
reasonable decisions based on gathered informa-
tion. (3) Data-centric learning methods effectively
utilize the data and address data challenges such
as data scarcity. (4) Prior exploration helps the
model familiarize itself with the test environment,
improving its ability to generalize.
We make three primary contributions. (1) We
systematically categorize current VLN benchmarks
from communication complexity and task objective
perspectives, with each category focusing on a dif-
ferent type of VLN task. (2) We hierarchically
classify current solutions and the papers within the
scope. (3) We discuss potential opportunities and
identify future directions.
2
Tasks and Datasets
The ability for an agent to interpret natural lan-
guage instructions (and in some instances, request
feedback during navigation) is what makes VLN
unique from visual navigation (Bonin-Font et al.,
2008). In Table 2, we mainly categorize current
datasets on two axes, Communication Complexity
and Task Objective.
Communication Complexity deﬁnes the level
at which the agent may converse with the oracle,
and we differentiate three levels: In the ﬁrst level,
the agent is only required to understand an Initial
Instruction before navigation starts. In the second
level, the agent sends a signal for help whenever it
is unsure, utilizing the Guidance from the oracle. In
the third level, the agent with Dialogue ability asks
questions in the form of natural language during the
navigation and understands further oracle guidance.
Task Objective deﬁnes how the agent attains
its goal based on the initial instructions from the
oracle. In the ﬁrst objective type, Fine-grained
Navigation, the agent can ﬁnd the target according
to a detailed step-by-step route description. In the
second type, Coarse-grained Navigation, the agent
is required to ﬁnd a distant target goal with a coarse
navigation description, requiring the agent to rea-
son a path in a navigable environment and possibly
elicit additional oracle help. Tasks in the previ-
ous two types only require the agent to navigate to
complete the mission. In the third type, Navigation
and Object Interaction, besides reasoning a path,
the agent also needs to interact with objects in the
environment to achieve the goal since the object
might be hidden or need to change physical states.2
As with coarse-grained navigation, some object in-
teraction tasks can require additional supervision
via dialogue with the oracle.
2.1
Initial Instruction
In many VLN benchmarks, the agent is given a nat-
ural language instruction for the whole navigation
process, such as “Go upstairs and pass the table in
the living room. Turn left and go through the door
in the middle.”
Fine-grained Navigation
An agent needs to
strictly follow the natural language instruction to
reach the target goal. Anderson et al. (2018b) create
the R2R dataset based on the Matterport3D simula-
tor (Chang et al., 2017). An embodied agent in R2R
moves through a house in the simulator traversing
edges on a navigation graph, jumping to adjacent
nodes containing panoramic views. R2R is ex-
tended to create other VLN benchmarks. Room-
for-Room joins paths in R2R to longer trajecto-
ries (Jain et al., 2019). Yan et al. (2020) collect
XL-R2R to extend R2R with Chinese instructions.
RxR (Ku et al., 2020) contains instructions from
English, Hindi, and Telegu. The dataset has more
samples and the instructions in it are time-aligned
to the virtual poses of the instruction. The English
split of RxR is further extended to build Landmark-
RxR (He et al., 2021) by incorporating landmark
information.
In most current datasets, agents traverse a nav-
igation graph at predeﬁned viewpoints. To facil-
2Navigation and Object Interaction includes both ﬁne-
grained and coarse-grained instructions, which ideally should
be split further. But given that there are only few datasets in
this category, we keep the current categorization in Table 2.


Comm
Complexity
Task Objective
Fine-grained Navigation
Coarse-grained Navigation
Nav + Object Interaction
Initial In-
struction(s)
Room-to-Room (Anderson et al., 2018b),
Room-for-Room (Jain et al., 2019),
Room-Across-Room (Ku et al., 2020),
XL-R2R (Yan et al., 2020), Landmark-
RxR (He et al., 2021), VLNCE (Krantz
et al., 2020), TOUCHDOWN (Chen
et al., 2019), StreetLearn (Mirowski
et al., 2019), StreetNav (Hermann et al.,
2020), Talk2Nav (Vasudevan et al.,
2021), LANI (Misra et al., 2018)
RoomNav (Wu et al., 2018),
EmbodiedQA (Das et al.,
2018), REVERIE (Qi et al.,
2020b), SOON (Zhu et al.,
2021a)
IQA (Gordon et al., 2018),
CHAI (Misra et al., 2018),
ALFRED (Shridhar et al.,
2020)
Oracle
Guidance
Just Ask (Chi et al., 2020)
VNLA
(Nguyen
et
al.,
2019),
HANNA
(Nguyen
and Daumé III, 2019), CE-
REALBAR
(Suhr
et
al.,
2019)
None
Dialogue
None
CVDN
(Thomason
et
al.,
2019b), RobotSlang (Baner-
jee et al., 2020), Talk the
Walk (de Vries et al., 2018)
TEACh (Padmakumar et al.,
2021), Minecraft Collabora-
tive Building (Narayan-Chen
et al., 2019), DialFRED (Gao
et al., 2022)
Table 1: Vision-and-Language Navigation benchmarks organized by Communication Complexity versus Task
Objective. Please refer to Appendix for more details about the datasets and the commonly used underlying simu-
lators.
itate transfer learning to real agents, VLN tasks
should provide a continuous action space and a
freely navigable environment. To this end, Krantz
et al. (2020) reconstruct the navigation graph based
R2R trajectories in continuous environments and
create VLNCE. Irshad et al. (2021) propose Robo-
VLN task where the agent operates in a continuous
action space over long-horizon trajectories.
Outdoor environments are usually more com-
plex and contain more objects than indoor environ-
ments. In TOUCHDOWN (Chen et al., 2019), an
agent follows instructions to navigate a streetview
rendered simulation of New York City to ﬁnd a
hidden object. Most photo-realistic outdoor VLN
datasets including TOUCHDOWN (Chen et al.,
2019), StreetLearn (Mirowski et al., 2019; Mehta
et al., 2020), StreetNav(Hermann et al., 2020), and
Talk2Nav (Vasudevan et al., 2021) are proposed
based on Google Street View.
Some work uses natural language to guide
drones. LANI (Misra et al., 2018) is a 3D syn-
thetic navigation environment, where an agent nav-
igates between landmarks following natural lan-
guage instructions. Current datasets on drone navi-
gation usually fall in a synthetic environment such
as Unity3D (Blukis et al., 2018, 2019).
Coarse-grained Navigation In real life, detailed
information about the route may not be available
since it may be unknown to the human instructor
(oracle). Usually, instructions are more concise and
contain merely information of the target goal.
RoomNav (Wu et al., 2018) requires agent navi-
gate according to instruction “go to X”, where X is
a predeﬁned room or object.
In Embodied QA (Das et al., 2018), the agent
navigates through the environment to ﬁnd an-
swer for a given question.
The instructions in
REVERIE (Qi et al., 2020b) are annotated by hu-
mans, and thus more complicated and diverse. The
agent navigates through the rooms and differen-
tiates the object against multiple competing can-
didates. In SOON (Zhu et al., 2021a), an agent
receives a long, complex coarse-to-ﬁne instruction
which gradually narrows down the search scope.
Navigation+Object Interaction For some tasks,
the target object might be hidden (e.g., the spoon in
a drawer), or need to change status (e.g., a sliced ap-
ple is requested but only a whole apple is available).
In these scenarios, it is necessary to interact with
the objects to accomplish the task (e.g., opening the
drawer or cutting the apple). Interactive Question
Answering (IQA) requires the agent to navigate
and sometimes to interact with objects to answer
a given question. Based on indoor scenes in AI2-
THOR (Kolve et al., 2017), Shridhar et al. (2020)
propose the ALFRED dataset, where agents are


provided with both coarse-grained and ﬁne-grained
instructions complete household tasks in an interac-
tive visual environment. CHAI (Misra et al., 2018)
requires the agent to navigate and simply interact
with the environments.
2.2
Oracle Guidance
Agents in Guidance VLN tasks may receive further
natural language guidance from the oracle during
navigation. For example, if the agent is unsure
of the next step (e.g., entering the kitchen), it can
send a [help] signal, and the oracle would assist by
responding “go left” (Nguyen et al., 2019).
Fine-grained Navigation The initial ﬁne-grained
navigation instruction may still be ambiguous in a
complex environment. Guidance from the oracle
could clarify possible confusion. Chi et al. (2020)
introduce Just Ask—a task where an agent could
ask oracle for help during navigation.
Coarse-grained Navigation With only a coarse-
grained instruction given at the beginning, the agent
tends to be more confused and spends more time ex-
ploring. Further guidance resolves this ambiguity.
VNLA (Nguyen et al., 2019) and HANNA (Nguyen
and Daumé III, 2019) both train an agent to nav-
igate indoors to ﬁnd objects.
The agent could
request help from the oracle, which responds by
providing a subtask which helps the agent make
progress. While oracle in VNLA uses predeﬁned
script to respond, the oracle in HANNA uses a neu-
ral network to generate natural language responses.
CEREALBAR (Suhr et al., 2019) is a collaborative
task between a leader and a follower. Both agents
move in a virtual game environment to collect valid
sets of cards.
Navigation+Object Interaction While VLN is
still in its youth, there are no VLN datasets in sup-
port of Guidance and Object Interaction.
2.3
Human Dialogue
It is human-friendly to use natural language to re-
quest help (Banerjee et al., 2020; Thomason et al.,
2019b). For example, when the agent is not sure
about what fruit the human wants, it could ask
“What fruit do you want, the banana in the refrig-
erator or the apple on the table?”, and the human
response would provide clear navigation direction.
Fine-grained Navigation No datasets are in the
scope of this category. Currently, route-detailed
instruction with possible guidance could help the
agent achieve relatively good performance in most
simulated environments. We expect datasets to be
developed for this category for super long horizon
navigation tasks in complex environments espe-
cially with rich dynamics where dialog is necessary
to clear confusions.
Coarse-grained Navigation CVDN (Thomason
et al., 2019b) is a dataset of human-human dia-
logues. Besides interpreting a natural language in-
struction and deciding on the following action, the
VLN agent also needs to ask questions in natural
language for guidance. The oracle, with knowl-
edge of the best next steps, needs to understand
and correctly answer said questions.
Dialogue is important in complex outdoor envi-
ronments. de Vries et al. (2018) introduce the Talk
the Walk dataset, where the guide has knowledge
from a map and guides the tourist to a destination,
but does not know the tourist’s location; while the
tourist navigates a 2D grid via discrete actions.
Navigation+Object Interaction Minecraft Col-
laborative Building (Narayan-Chen et al., 2019)
studies how an agent places blocks into a building
by communicating with the oracle. TEACh (Pad-
makumar et al., 2021) is a dataset that studies ob-
ject interaction and navigation with free-form dia-
log. The follower converses with the commander
and interacts with the environment to complete
various house tasks such as making coffee. Dial-
FRED (Gao et al., 2022) extends ALFRED (Shrid-
har et al., 2020) dataset by allowing the agent to
actively ask questions.
3
Evaluation
Goal-oriented Metrics
mainly consider the
agent’s proximity to the goal. The most intuitive
is Success Rate (SR), which measures how fre-
quently an agent completes the task within a certain
distance of the goal. Goal Progress (Thomason
et al., 2019b) measures the reduction in remain-
ing distance to the target goal. Path Length (PL)
measures the total length of the navigation path.
Shortest-Path Distance (SPD) measures the mean
distance between the agent’s ﬁnal location and the
goal. Since a longer path length is undesirable
(increases duration and wear-and-tear on actual
robots), Success weighted by Path Length (SPL)
(Anderson et al., 2018a) balances both Success
Rate and Path Length. Similarly, Success weighted
by Edit Distance (SED) (Chen et al., 2019) com-
pares the expert’s actions/trajectory to the agent’s
actions/trajectory, also balancing SR and PL. Ora-
cle Navigation Error (ONE) takes the shortest dis-


tance from any node in the path rather than just the
last node, and Oracle Success Rate (OSR) measures
whether any node in the path is within a threshold
from the target location.
Path-ﬁdelity Metrics evaluate to what extent an
agent follows the desired path. Some tasks require
the agent not only to ﬁnd the goal location but
also to follow speciﬁc path. Fidelity measures the
matches between the action sequence in the expert
demonstration and the action sequence in the agent
trajectory. Coverage weighted by LS (CLS) (Jain
et al., 2019) is the product of the Path Coverage
(PC) and Length Score (LS) with respect to the ref-
erence path. It measures how closely an agent’s tra-
jectory follows the reference path. Normalized Dy-
namic Time Warping (nDTW) (Ilharco et al., 2019)
softly penalizes deviations from the reference path
to calculate the match between two paths. Success
weighted by normalized Dynamic Time Warping
(SDTW) (Ilharco et al., 2019) further constrains
nDTW to only successful episodes to capture both
success and ﬁdelity.
4
VLN Methods
As shown in Figure 2, we categorize existing meth-
ods into Representation Learning, Action Strategy
Learning, Data-centric Learning, and Prior Ex-
ploration. Representation learning methods help
agent understand relations between these modal-
ities since VLN involves multiple modalities, in-
cluding vision, language, and action. Moreover,
VLN is a complex reasoning task where mission re-
sults depend on the accumulating steps, and better
action strategies help the decision-making process.
Additionally, VLN tasks face challenges within
their training data. One severe problem is scarcity.
Collecting training data for VLN is expensive and
time-consuming, and the existing VLN datasets are
relatively small with respect to the complexity of
VLN tasks. Therefore, data-centric methods help
to utilize the existing data and create more train-
ing data. Prior exploration helps adapt agents to
previously unseen environments, improving their
ability to generalize, decreasing the performance
gap between seen versus unseen environments.
4.1
Representation Learning
Representation learning helps the agent understand
how the words in the instruction relate to the per-
ceived features in the environment.
Data-centric
Represen-
tation 
Learning                                         
Strategy 
Learning
Prior
Exploration
Methods
Curriculum 
Learning
Reinforcement 
Learning
Pre-training
Memory 
Structure
Semantic 
Understanding
Graph 
Representation
Auxiliary 
Task
Exploration 
during 
Navigation
Navigation 
Planning
Asking for 
Help
Multitask 
Learning
Data 
Augmentation
Instruction 
Interpretation
Figure 2: Categories of VLN methods. Methods may
not be mutually exclusive to an individual category.
4.1.1
Pretraining
Vision or Language Using a pretrained model to
initialize a vision or text encoder provides agents
with single-modality knowledge. pretrained vi-
sion models may use a ResNet (He et al., 2016)
or Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020).
Other navigation tasks (Wijmans et al., 2019b)
may also provide visual initialization (Krantz et al.,
2020). Large pretrained language models such as
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and GPT (Radford et al.,
2019) can encode language and improve instruction
understanding (Li et al., 2019), which can be fur-
ther pretrained with VLN instructions (Pashevich
et al., 2021) before ﬁne-tuning in VLN task.
Vision and Language Vision-and-language pre-
trained models provide good joint representation
for text and vision.
A common practice is to
initialize a VLN agent (Kim et al., 2021) with
a pretrained model such as ViLBERT (Lu et al.,
2019). The agent may be further trained with VLN-
speciﬁc features such as objects and rooms (Qi
et al., 2021).
VLN Downstream tasks beneﬁt from being closely
related to the pretraining task. Researchers also
explored pretraining on the VLN domain directly.
VLN-BERT (Majumdar et al., 2020) pretrains nav-
igation models to measure the compatibility be-
tween paths and instructions, which formats VLN
as a path selection problem. PREVALENT (Hao
et al., 2020) is trained from scratch on image-text-
action triplets to learn textual representations in
VLN tasks. The output embedding from the [CLS]
token in BERT-based pretraining models could be
leveraged in a recurrent fashion to represent his-


tory state (Hong et al., 2021; Moudgil et al., 2021).
Airbert (Guhur et al., 2021) achieve good perfor-
mance on few-shot setting after pretraining on a
large-scale in-domain dataset.
4.1.2
Semantic Understanding
Semantic understanding of VLN tasks incorporates
knowledge about important features in VLN. In
addition to the raw features, high-level semantic
representations also improve performance in un-
seen environments.
Intra-Modality Visual or textual modalities can
be decomposed into many features, which matter
differently in VLN. The overall visual features ex-
tracted by a neural model may not be important
and may actually hurt the performance in some
cases (Thomason et al., 2019a; Hu et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2020b; Schumann and Riezler, 2022).
Therefore, it is important to ﬁnd the feature(s) that
best improve performance. High-level features
such as visual appearance, route structure, and de-
tected objects outperform the low level visual fea-
tures extracted by CNN (Hu et al., 2019). Different
types of tokens within the instruction also function
differently (Zhu et al., 2021c). Extracting these
tokens and encoding the object tokens and direc-
tions tokens are crucial (Qi et al., 2020a; Zhu et al.,
2021c).
Inter-Modality Semantic connections between
different modalities: actions, scenes, observed ob-
jects, direction clues, and objects mentioned in in-
structions can be extracted and then softly aligned
with attention mechanism (Qi et al., 2020a; Gao
et al., 2021). The soft alignment also highlights rel-
evant parts of the instruction with respect to the cur-
rent step (Landi et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020a).
4.1.3
Graph Representation
Building graph to incorporate structured informa-
tion from instruction and environment observation
provides explicit semantic relation to guide the nav-
igation. The graph neural network may encode
the relation between text and vision to better inter-
pret the context information (Hong et al., 2020a;
Deng et al., 2020). The graph could record the loca-
tion information during the navigation, which can
used to predict the most likely trajectory (Ander-
son et al., 2019a) or probability distribution over
action space (Deng et al., 2020). When connected
with prior exploration, an overview graph about the
navigable environment (Chen et al., 2021a) can be
built to improve navigation interpretation.
4.1.4
Memory-augmented Model
Information accumulates as the agent navigates,
which is not efﬁcient to utilize directly. Memory
structure helps the agent effectively leverage the
navigation history. Some solutions leverage mem-
ory modules such as LSTMs or recurrently utilize
informative states (Hong et al., 2021), which can be
relatively easily implemented, but may struggle to
remember features at the beginning of the path as
path length increases. Another solution is to build a
separate memory model to store the relevant infor-
mation (Zhu et al., 2020c; Lin et al., 2021; Nguyen
and Daumé III, 2019). Notably, by hierarchically
encoding a single view, a panorama, and then all
panoramas in history, HAMT (Chen et al., 2021b)
successfully utilized the full navigation history for
decision-making.
4.1.5
Auxiliary Tasks
Auxiliary tasks help the agent better understand
the environment and its own status without extra
labels. From the machine learning perspective, an
auxiliary task is usually achieved in the form of
an additional loss function.
The auxiliary task
could, for example, explain its previous actions,
or predict information about future decisions (Zhu
et al., 2020a). Auxiliary tasks could also involve
the current mission such as current task accom-
plishment, and vision & instruction alignment (Ma
et al., 2019a; Zhu et al., 2020a). Notably, auxil-
iary tasks are effective when adapting pretrained
representations for VLN (Huang et al., 2019b).
4.2
Action Strategy Learning
With many possible action choices and complicated
environment, action strategy learning provides a
variety of methods to help the agent decide on those
best actions.
4.2.1
Reinforcement Learning
VLN is a sequential decision-making problem and
can naturally be modeled as a Markov decision pro-
cess. So Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods
are proposed to learn better policy for VLN tasks.
A critical challenge for RL methods is that VLN
agents only receive the success signal at the end of
the episode, so it is difﬁcult to know which actions
to attribute success to, and which to penalize. To
address the ill-posed feedback issue, Wang et al.
(2019, 2020c) propose RCM model to enforces
cross-modal grounding both locally and globally,


with goal-oriented extrinsic reward and instruction-
ﬁdelity intrinsic reward. He et al. (2021) propose
to utilize the local alignment between the instruc-
tion and critical landmarks as the reward. Eval-
uation metrics such as CLS (Jain et al., 2019) or
nDTW (Ilharco et al., 2019) can also provide in-
formative reward signal (Landi et al., 2020), and
natural language may also provide suggestions for
reward (Fu et al., 2019).
To model the dynamics in the environment,
Wang et al. (2018) leverage model-based reinforce-
ment learning to predict the next state and improve
the generalization in unseen environment. Zhang
et al. (2020a) ﬁnd recursively alternating the learn-
ing schemes of imitation and reinforcement learn-
ing improve the performance.
4.2.2
Exploration during Navigation
Exploring and gathering environmental informa-
tion while navigating provides a better understand-
ing of the state space. Student-forcing is a fre-
quently used strategy, where the agent keeps nav-
igating based on sampled actions and is super-
vised by the shortest-path action (Anderson et al.,
2018b).
There is a tradeoff between exploration versus
exploitation: with more exploration, the agent sees
better performance at the cost of a longer path and
longer duration, so the model needs to determine
when and how deep to explore (Wang et al., 2020a).
After having gathered the local information, the
agent needs to decide which step to choose, or
whether to backtrack (Ke et al., 2019). Notably,
Koh et al. (2021) designed Pathdreamer, a visual
world model to synthesize visual observation future
viewpoints without actually looking ahead.
4.2.3
Navigation Planning
Planing future navigation steps leads to a better
action strategy. From the visual side, predicting
the waypoints (Krantz et al., 2021), next state and
reward (Wang et al., 2018), generate future obser-
vation (Koh et al., 2021) or incorporating neigh-
bor views (An et al., 2021) has proven effective.
Recognizing and stopping at the correct location
also reduces navigation costs (Xiang et al., 2020).
The natural language instruction also contains land-
marks and direction clues to plan detailed steps.
Anderson et al. (2019b) predict the forthcoming
events based on the instruction, which is used to
predict actions with a semantic spatial map. (Kurita
and Cho, 2020) formulates VLN as a generative
approach where a language model is used to com-
pute the distribution over all possible instructions.
The instruction may also be used to tag navigation
and interaction milestones which the agent needs to
complete step by step (Raychaudhuri et al., 2021;
Song et al., 2022).
4.2.4
Asking for Help
An intelligent agent asks for help when uncertain
about the next action (Nguyen et al., 2021a). Ac-
tion probabilities or a separately trained model (Chi
et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021e; Nguyen et al., 2021a)
can be leveraged to decide whether to ask for help.
Using natural language to converse with the or-
acle covers a wider problem scope than sending
a signal. Both rule-based methods (Padmakumar
et al., 2021) and neural-based methods (Roman
et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2021a) have been devel-
oped to build navigation agents with dialog ability.
Meanwhile, for tasks (Thomason et al., 2019b; Pad-
makumar et al., 2021) that do not provide an oracle
agent to answer question in natural language, re-
searchers also need to build a rule-based (Padmaku-
mar et al., 2021) or neural-based (Roman et al.,
2020) oracle. DialFRED (Gao et al., 2022) uses a
language model as an oracle to answer questions.
4.3
Data-centric Learning
Compared with previously discussed works that
focus on building a better VLN agent structure,
data-centric methods most effectively utilize the
existing data, or create synthetic data.
4.3.1
Data Augmentation
Trajectory-Instruction
Augmentation
Aug-
mented path-instruction pairs could be used in
VLN directly. Currently the common practice is
to train a speaker module to generate instructions
given a navigation path (Fried et al., 2018). This
generated data have varying quality (Zhao et al.,
2021; Huang et al., 2019a). Therefore an alignment
scorer (Huang et al., 2019b) or adversarial discrim-
inator (Fu et al., 2020) can select high-quality pairs
for augmentation. Style transfer module may also
improve instruction quality via adapting instruc-
tions from the source domain (Zhu et al., 2021d).
Environment Augmentation
Generating more
environment data not only helps generate more
trajectories, but also alleviates the problem of over-
ﬁtting in seen environments.
Randomly mask-
ing the same visual feature across different view-
points (Tan et al., 2019), splitting the house scenes


and re-mixing them (Liu et al., 2021), or changing
style and objects (Li et al., 2022) could create new
environments, which could further be used to gen-
erate more trajectory-instruction pairs (Fried et al.,
2018). Training data may also be augmented by
replacing some visual features with counterfactual
ones (Parvaneh et al., 2020).
4.3.2
Curriculum Learning
Curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009) gradually
increases the task’s difﬁculty during the training
process. The instruction length could be a metric
for task difﬁculty. BabyWalk (Zhu et al., 2020b)
keep increasing training samples’ instruction length
during the training process. Attributes from the
trajectory may also be used to rank task difﬁculty.
Zhang et al. (2021) rearrange the R2R dataset using
the number of rooms each path traverses. They
found curriculum learning helps smooth the loss
landscape and ﬁnd a better local optima.
4.3.3
Multitask Learning
Different VLN tasks can beneﬁt from each other by
cross-task knowledge transfer. Wang et al. (2020d)
propose an environment-agnostic multitask naviga-
tion model for both VLN and Navigation from Di-
alog History tasks (Thomason et al., 2019b). Chap-
lot et al. (2020) propose an attention module to train
a multitask navigation agent to follow instructions
and answer questions (Wijmans et al., 2019a).
4.3.4
Instruction Interpretation
A trajectory instruction interpreted multiple times
in different ways may help the agent better under-
stand its objective. LEO (Xia et al., 2020) leverages
and encodes all the instructions with a shared set
of parameters to enhance the textual understanding.
LWIT (Nguyen et al., 2021b) interprets the instruc-
tions to make it clear to interact with what class
of objects. Shorter, and more concise instructions
provide clearer guidance for the agent compared
to longer, semantically entangled instructions, thus
Hong et al. (2020b) breaks long instructions into
shorter ones, allowing the agent to track progress
and focus on each atomic instruction individually.
4.4
Prior Exploration
Good performance in seen environments often can-
not generalize to unseen environments (Hu et al.,
2019; Parvaneh et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2019). Prior
exploration methods allow the agent to observe and
adapt to unseen environments,3 bridging the perfor-
mance gap between seen and unseen environments.
Wang et al. (2019) introduce a self-supervised
imitation learning to learn from the agent’s own
past, good behaviors. The best navigation path
determined to align the instruction the best by a
matching critic will be used to update the agent.
Tan et al. (2019) leverage the testing environments
to sample and augment paths for adaptation. Fu
et al. (2020) propose environment-based prior ex-
ploration, where the agent can only explore a par-
ticular environment where it is deployed. When
utilizing graph, prior exploration may construct a
map or overview about the unseen environment
to provide explicit guidance for navigation (Chen
et al., 2021a; Zhou et al., 2021).
5
Related Visual-and-Language Tasks
This paper focuses on Vision-and-Language Nav-
igation tasks with an emphasis on photo-realistic
environments. 2D map may also be a uesful vir-
tual environment for navigation tasks (Vogel and
Jurafsky, 2010; Chen and Mooney, 2011; Paz-
Argaman and Tsarfaty, 2019). Synthetic environ-
ments may also be a substitute for realistic envi-
ronment (MacMahon et al., 2006; Blukis et al.,
2020). Tellex et al. (2011) propose to instantiate a
probabilistic graphical model for natural language
commands in robotic navigation and mobile manip-
ulation process.
In VLN, an agent needs to follow the given in-
struction and even ask for assistants in human lan-
guage. An agent in Visual Navigation tasks is usu-
ally not required to understand information from
textual modality. Visual Navigation (Zhu et al.,
2021b) is a problem of navigating an agent from
the current location to ﬁnd the goal target. Re-
searchers have achieved success in both simulated
environments (Zhu et al., 2017; Mirowski, 2019)
and real environments (Mirowski et al., 2018).
6
Conclusion and Future Directions
In this paper, we discuss the importance of VLN
agents as a part of society, how their tasks vary as
a function of communication level versus task ob-
jective, and how different agents may be evaluated.
We broadly review VLN methodologies and cate-
gorize them. This paper only discusses these issues
broadly at an introductory level. In reviewing these
3Thus prior exploration methods are not directly compara-
ble with other VLN methods.


papers, we can see the immense progress that has
already been made, as well as directions that this
research topic can be expanded on.
Current methods usually do not explicitly utilize
external knowledge such as objects and general
house descriptions in Wikipedia. Incorporating
knowledge also improves the interpretability and
trust of embodied AI. Moreover, currently several
navigation agents learn which direction to move
and with what to interact, but there is a last-mile
problem of VLN—how to interact with objects. An-
derson et al. (2018b) asked whether a robot could
learn to “Bring me a spoon”; new research may ask
how a robot can learn to “Pick up a spoon”. The
environments also lack diversity: most interior ter-
restrial VLN data consists of American houses, but
never warehouses or hospitals: the places where
these agents may be of most use.
Below we detail additional future directions:
Collaborative VLN Current VLN benchmarks
and methods predominantly focus on tasks where
only one agent navigates, yet complicated real-
world scenarios may require several robots collabo-
rating. Multi-agent VLN tasks require development
in swarm intelligence, information communication,
and performance evaluation. MeetUp! (Ilinykh
et al., 2019) is a two-player coordination game
where players move in a visual environment to
ﬁnd each other. VLN studies the relationship be-
tween the human and the environment in Figure 1,
yet here humans are oracles simply observing (but
not acting on) the environment. Collaboration be-
tween humans and robots is crucial for them to
work together as teams (e.g., as personal assistants
or helping in construction). Future work may target
at collaborative VLN between multiple agents or
between human and agents.
Simulation to Reality There is a performance loss
when transferred to real-life robot navigation (An-
derson et al., 2020). Real robots function in contin-
uous space, but most simulators only allow agents
to “hop” through a pre-deﬁned navigation graph
which is unrealistic for three reasons (Krantz et al.,
2020).
Navigation graphs assume: (1) perfect
localization—in the real world it is a noisy estimate;
(2) oracle navigation—real robots cannot “teleport”
to a new node; (3) known topology—in reality an
agent may not have access to a preset list of naviga-
ble nodes. Continuous implementations of realistic
environments may contain patches of the images,
be blurred, or have parallax errors, making them
unrealistic. A simulation that is based on both
a 3D model and realistic imagery could improve
the match between virtual sensors (in simulation)
and real sensors. Lastly, most simulators assume a
static environment only changed by the agent. This
does not account for other dynamics such as people
walking or objects moving, nor does it account for
lighting conditions through the day. VLN environ-
ments with probabilistic transition functions may
also narrow the gap between simulation and reality.
Ethics & Privacy
During both training and in-
ference, VLN agents may observe and store sen-
sitive information that can get leaked or misused.
Effective navigation with privacy protection is cru-
cially important. Relevant areas such as federated
learning (Koneˇcn`y et al., 2016) or differential pri-
vacy (Dwork et al., 2006) could also be studied in
VLN domain to preserve the privacy of training
and inference environments.
Multicultural VLN
VLN lacks diversity in 3D
environments: most outdoor VLN datasets use
Google Street View recorded in major Ameri-
can cities, but lacks data in developing countries.
Agents trained on American data face potential
generalization problems in other city or housing
layouts. Future work should explore more diverse
environments across multiple cultures and regions.
Multilingual VLN datasets (Yan et al., 2020; Ku
et al., 2020) could be good resources to study multi-
cultural differences from the linguistic perspective.
Acknowledgement
We thank anonymous reviewers, Juncheng Li, Yue
Fan, Tongzhou Jiang for their feedback.
References
Dong An, Yuankai Qi, Yan Huang, Qi Wu, Liang Wang,
and Tieniu Tan. 2021.
Neighbor-view enhanced
model for vision and language navigation.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.07201.
Peter Anderson, Angel Chang, Devendra Singh Chap-
lot, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Saurabh Gupta, Vladlen
Koltun, Jana Kosecka, Jitendra Malik, Roozbeh Mot-
taghi, Manolis Savva, et al. 2018a.
On evalua-
tion of embodied navigation agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.06757.
Peter Anderson,
Ayush Shrivastava,
Devi Parikh,
Dhruv Batra, and Stefan Lee. 2019a.
Chasing
ghosts: Instruction following as bayesian state track-
ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS).


Peter Anderson,
Ayush Shrivastava,
Devi Parikh,
Dhruv Batra, and Stefan Lee. 2019b.
Chasing
ghosts: Instruction following as bayesian state track-
ing.
Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 32:371–381.
Peter Anderson, Ayush Shrivastava, Joanne Truong, Ar-
jun Majumdar, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra, and Ste-
fan Lee. 2020. Sim-to-real transfer for vision-and-
language navigation. In Conference on Robot Learn-
ing (CoRL).
Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce,
Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen
Gould, and Anton van den Hengel. 2018b. Vision-
and-language navigation:
Interpreting visually-
grounded navigation instructions in real environ-
ments. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Shurjo Banerjee, Jesse Thomason, and Jason J. Corso.
2020. The RobotSlang Benchmark: Dialog-guided
robot localization and navigation. In Conference on
Robot Learning (CoRL).
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert,
and Jason Weston. 2009. Curriculum learning. In
Proceedings of the 26th annual international confer-
ence on machine learning, pages 41–48.
Valts Blukis,
Nataly Brukhim,
Andrew Bennett,
Ross A. Knepper, and Yoav Artzi. 2018.
Follow-
ing high-level navigation instructions on a simulated
quadcopter with imitation learning.
In Robotics:
Science and Systems (RSS).
Valts Blukis,
Yannick Terme,
Eyvind Niklasson,
Ross A. Knepper, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Learning to
map natural language instructions to physical quad-
copter control using simulated ﬂight. In Conference
on Robot Learning (CoRL).
Valts Blukis,
Yannick Terme,
Eyvind Niklasson,
Ross A. Knepper, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. Learning to
map natural language instructions to physical quad-
copter control using simulated ﬂight.
In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Robot Learning, volume
100 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 1415–1438. PMLR.
Francisco Bonin-Font, Alberto Ortiz, and Gabriel
Oliver. 2008. Visual navigation for mobile robots:
A survey. Journal of intelligent and robotic systems,
53(3):263–296.
Angel Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas Funkhouser, Ma-
ciej Halber, Matthias Niessner, Manolis Savva, Shu-
ran Song, Andy Zeng, and Yinda Zhang. 2017. Mat-
terport3D: Learning from RGB-D data in indoor en-
vironments. International Conference on 3D Vision
(3DV).
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Lisa Lee, Ruslan Salakhutdi-
nov, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2020. Embodied
multimodal multitask learning.
In Proceedings of
the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-20. International Joint
Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Organization.
David Chen and Raymond Mooney. 2011. Learning
to interpret natural language navigation instructions
from observations. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence.
Howard Chen, Alane Suhr, Dipendra Misra, Noah
Snavely, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Touchdown: Nat-
ural language navigation and spatial reasoning in vi-
sual street environments. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 12530–12539.
Kevin Chen, Junshen K Chen, Jo Chuang, Marynel
Vázquez, and Silvio Savarese. 2021a. Topological
planning with transformers for vision-and-language
navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 11276–11286.
Shizhe Chen, Pierre-Louis Guhur, Cordelia Schmid,
and Ivan Laptev. 2021b.
History aware multi-
modal transformer for vision-and-language naviga-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13309.
Ta-Chung Chi, Minmin Shen, Mihail Eric, Seokhwan
Kim, and Dilek Hakkani-tur. 2020.
Just ask: An
interactive learning framework for vision and lan-
guage navigation. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence.
Abhishek Das, Samyak Datta, Georgia Gkioxari, Ste-
fan Lee, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2018. Em-
bodied question answering. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 1–10.
Harm de Vries, Kurt Shuster, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh,
Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2018.
Talk the
walk: Navigating new york city through grounded
dialogue.
Zhiwei Deng, Karthik Narasimhan, and Olga Rus-
sakovsky. 2020. Evolving graphical planner: Con-
textual global planning for vision-and-language nav-
igation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2020-December.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. In NAACL-HLT (1).
Alexey
Dosovitskiy,
Lucas
Beyer,
Alexander
Kolesnikov,
Dirk
Weissenborn,
Xiaohua
Zhai,
Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias
Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. 2020.
An image is worth 16x16 words:
Transformers
for image recognition at scale.
In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and
Adam Smith. 2006. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
in private data analysis. In Theory of cryptography
conference, pages 265–284. Springer.


Daniel Fried, Ronghang Hu, Volkan Cirik, Anna
Rohrbach, Jacob Andreas, Louis-Philippe Morency,
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Kate Saenko, Dan Klein,
and Trevor Darrell. 2018. Speaker-follower models
for vision-and-language navigation. In Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Justin Fu, Anoop Korattikara, Sergey Levine, and
Sergio Guadarrama. 2019.
From language to
goals:
Inverse reinforcement learning for vision-
based
instruction
following.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1902.07742.
Tsu-Jui Fu, Xin Eric Wang, Matthew Peterson, Scott
Grafton, Miguel Eckstein, and William Yang Wang.
2020.
Counterfactual vision-and-language naviga-
tion via adversarial path sampler. In European Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Chen Gao, Jinyu Chen, Si Liu, Luting Wang, Qiong
Zhang, and Qi Wu. 2021. Room-and-object aware
knowledge reasoning for remote embodied referring
expression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 3064–3073.
Xiaofeng Gao, Qiaozi Gao, Ran Gong, Kaixiang
Lin, Govind Thattai, and Gaurav S Sukhatme.
2022.
Dialfred:
Dialogue-enabled agents for
embodied instruction following.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.13330.
Daniel Gordon, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mohammad
Rastegari, Joseph Redmon, Dieter Fox, and Ali
Farhadi. 2018. Iqa: Visual question answering in in-
teractive environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, pages 4089–4098.
Pierre-Louis Guhur, Makarand Tapaswi, Shizhe Chen,
Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. 2021. Airbert:
In-domain pretraining for vision-and-language nav-
igation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pages 1634–1643.
Weituo Hao, Chunyuan Li, Xiujun Li, Lawrence Carin,
and Jianfeng Gao. 2020. Towards learning a generic
agent for vision-and-language navigation via pre-
training. Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR).
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–
778.
Keji He, Yan Huang, Qi Wu, Jianhua Yang, Dong An,
Shuanglin Sima, and Liang Wang. 2021. Landmark-
rxr: Solving vision-and-language navigation with
ﬁne-grained alignment supervision. In NeurIPS.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Mateusz Malinowski, Piotr
Mirowski, Andras Banki-Horvath, Keith Anderson,
and Raia Hadsell. 2020. Learning to follow direc-
tions in street view. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence.
Yicong Hong, Cristian Rodriguez, Yuankai Qi, Qi Wu,
and Stephen Gould. 2020a.
Language and visual
entity relationship graph for agent navigation. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
33:7685–7696.
Yicong Hong, Cristian Rodriguez, Qi Wu, and Stephen
Gould. 2020b.
Sub-instruction aware vision-and-
language navigation.
In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 3360–3376, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yicong Hong, Qi Wu, Yuankai Qi, Cristian Rodriguez-
Opazo, and Stephen Gould. 2021. Vln bert: A re-
current vision-and-language bert for navigation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
1643–1653.
Ronghang Hu, Daniel Fried, Anna Rohrbach, Dan
Klein, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. 2019. Are
you looking? grounding to multiple modalities in
vision-and-language navigation. In Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 6551–6557, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Haoshuo Huang, Vihan Jain, Harsh Mehta, Jason
Baldridge, and Eugene Ie. 2019a. Multi-modal dis-
criminative model for vision-and-language naviga-
tion.
In Proceedings of the Combined Workshop
on Spatial Language Understanding (SpLU) and
Grounded Communication for Robotics (RoboNLP),
pages 40–49.
Haoshuo Huang, Vihan Jain, Harsh Mehta, Alexander
Ku, Gabriel Magalhaes, Jason Baldridge, and Eu-
gene Ie. 2019b. Transferable representation learning
in vision-and-language navigation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ICCV).
Gabriel Ilharco, Vihan Jain, Alexander Ku, Eugene Ie,
and Jason Baldridge. 2019. General evaluation for
instruction conditioned navigation using dynamic
time warping. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05446.
Nikolai Ilinykh, Sina Zarrieß, and David Schlangen.
2019.
Meetup!
a corpus of joint activity dia-
logues in a visual environment.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.05084.
Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Chih-Yao Ma, and Zsolt
Kira. 2021.
Hierarchical cross-modal agent for
robotics vision-and-language navigation.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.10674.
Vihan Jain, Gabriel Magalhaes, Alexander Ku, Ashish
Vaswani, Eugene Ie, and Jason Baldridge. 2019.


Stay on the path: Instruction ﬁdelity in vision-and-
language navigation. In Proceedings of the 57th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 1862–1872, Florence, Italy. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Liyiming Ke, Xiujun Li, Yonatan Bisk, Ari Holtz-
man, Zhe Gan, Jingjing Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin
Choi, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. 2019.
Tactical
rewind: Self-correction via backtracking in vision-
and-language navigation.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR).
Hyounghun Kim, Jialu Li, and Mohit Bansal. 2021.
Ndh-full:
Learning and evaluating navigational
agents on full-length dialogue. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 6432–6442.
Jing Yu Koh, Honglak Lee, Yinfei Yang, Jason
Baldridge, and Peter Anderson. 2021. Pathdreamer:
A world model for indoor navigation. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 14738–14748.
Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli Van-
derBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel Gor-
don, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi.
2017. AI2-THOR: An Interactive 3D Environment
for Visual AI. arXiv.
Jakub Koneˇcn`y, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Pe-
ter Richtárik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and Dave
Bacon. 2016. Federated learning: Strategies for im-
proving communication efﬁciency. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.05492.
Jacob Krantz, Aaron Gokaslan, Dhruv Batra, Ste-
fan Lee, and Oleksandr Maksymets. 2021.
Way-
point models for instruction-guided navigation in
continuous environments.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), pages 15162–15171.
Jacob Krantz, Erik Wijmans, Arjun Majumdar, Dhruv
Batra, and Stefan Lee. 2020. Beyond the nav-graph:
Vision-and-language navigation in continuous envi-
ronments. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, pages
104–120, Cham. Springer International Publishing.
Alexander Ku, Peter Anderson, Roma Patel, Eugene
Ie, and Jason Baldridge. 2020. Room-Across-Room:
Multilingual vision-and-language navigation with
dense spatiotemporal grounding. In Conference on
Empirical Methods for Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP).
Shuhei Kurita and Kyunghyun Cho. 2020. Generative
language-grounded policy in vision-and-language
navigation with bayes’ rule. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.
Federico Landi, Lorenzo Baraldi, Marcella Cornia,
Massimiliano Corsini, and Rita Cucchiara. 2020.
Perceive, transform, and act: Multi-modal attention
networks for vision-and-language navigation.
Federico
Landi,
Lorenzo
Baraldi,
Massimiliano
Corsini, and Rita Cucchiara. 2019.
Embodied
vision-and-language navigation with dynamic con-
volutional ﬁlters. In Proceedings of the British Ma-
chine Vision Conference.
Jialu Li, Hao Tan, and Mohit Bansal. 2022. Envedit:
Environment editing for vision-and-language navi-
gation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15685.
Xiujun Li, Chunyuan Li, Qiaolin Xia, Yonatan Bisk,
Asli Celikyilmaz, Jianfeng Gao, Noah Smith, and
Yejin Choi. 2019. Robust navigation with language
pretraining and stochastic sampling. In Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Xiangru Lin, Guanbin Li, and Yizhou Yu. 2021. Scene-
intuitive agent for remote embodied visual ground-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
7036–7045.
Chong Liu, Fengda Zhu, Xiaojun Chang, Xiaodan
Liang, Zongyuan Ge, and Yi-Dong Shen. 2021.
Vision-language navigation with random environ-
mental mixup. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pages 1644–1654.
Jiasen Lu, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan
Lee. 2019. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visi-
olinguistic representations for vision-and-language
tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.
Chih-Yao Ma, Jiasen Lu, Zuxuan Wu, Ghassan Al-
Regib, Zsolt Kira, Richard Socher, and Caiming
Xiong. 2019a. Self-monitoring navigation agent via
auxiliary progress estimation. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Chih-Yao Ma, Zuxuan Wu, Ghassan AlRegib, Caiming
Xiong, and Zsolt Kira. 2019b. The regretful agent:
Heuristic-aided navigation through progress estima-
tion.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Matt MacMahon, Brian Stankiewicz, and Benjamin
Kuipers. 2006. Walk the talk: Connecting language,
knowledge, and action in route instructions.
Def,
2(6):4.
Arjun Majumdar, Ayush Shrivastava, Stefan Lee, Peter
Anderson, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2020. Im-
proving vision-and-language navigation with image-
text pairs from the web. In Proceedings of the Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Manolis
Savva*,
Abhishek
Kadian*,
Oleksandr
Maksymets*, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana
Jain, Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra
Malik, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2019. Habitat:
A Platform for Embodied AI Research. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV).


Harsh Mehta, Yoav Artzi, Jason Baldridge, Eugene Ie,
and Piotr Mirowski. 2020. Retouchdown: Releasing
touchdown on StreetLearn as a public resource for
language grounding tasks in street view. In Proceed-
ings of the Third International Workshop on Spatial
Language Understanding, pages 56–62, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Piotr Mirowski. 2019.
Learning to navigate.
In
1st International Workshop on Multimodal Under-
standing and Learning for Embodied Applications,
MULEA ’19, page 25, New York, NY, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery.
Piotr Mirowski, Andras Banki-Horvath, Keith Ander-
son, Denis Teplyashin, Karl Moritz Hermann, Ma-
teusz Malinowski, Matthew Koichi Grimes, Karen
Simonyan, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Andrew Zisserman,
et al. 2019. The streetlearn environment and dataset.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.01292.
Piotr Mirowski, Matthew Koichi Grimes, Mateusz
Malinowski, Karl Moritz Hermann, Keith Ander-
son, Denis Teplyashin, Karen Simonyan, Koray
Kavukcuoglu, Andrew Zisserman, and Raia Had-
sell. 2018. Learning to navigate in cities without a
map. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
NIPS’18, page 2424–2435, Red Hook, NY, USA.
Curran Associates Inc.
Dipendra Misra, Andrew Bennett, Valts Blukis, Eyvind
Niklasson, Max Shatkhin, and Yoav Artzi. 2018.
Mapping instructions to actions in 3d environments
with visual goal prediction. In Proceedings of the
2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 2667–2678.
Abhinav Moudgil, Arjun Majumdar, Harsh Agrawal,
Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra. 2021.
Soat:
A
scene- and object-aware transformer for vision-and-
language navigation. In NeurIPS.
Anjali Narayan-Chen, Prashant Jayannavar, and Ju-
lia Hockenmaier. 2019.
Collaborative dialogue in
Minecraft. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Khanh Nguyen, Yonatan Bisk, and Hal Daumé. 2021a.
A framework for learning to request rich and contex-
tually useful information from humans.
Khanh Nguyen and Hal Daumé III. 2019.
Help,
anna! visual navigation with natural multimodal as-
sistance via retrospective curiosity-encouraging im-
itation learning. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 684–695, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Khanh Nguyen, Debadeepta Dey, Chris Brockett, and
Bill Dolan. 2019.
Vision-based navigation with
language-based assistance via imitation learning
with indirect intervention.
In The IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR).
Van-Quang
Nguyen,
Masanori
Suganuma,
and
Takayuki Okatani. 2021b.
Look wide and inter-
pret twice: Improving performance on interactive
instruction-following
tasks.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2106.00596.
Aishwarya Padmakumar, Jesse Thomason, Ayush Shri-
vastava, Patrick Lange, Anjali Narayan-Chen, Span-
dana Gella, Robinson Piramithu, Gokhan Tur, and
Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2021. Teach: Task-driven em-
bodied agents that chat.
Amin Parvaneh, Ehsan Abbasnejad, Damien Teney,
Qinfeng Shi, and Anton van den Hengel. 2020.
Counterfactual vision-and-language navigation: Un-
ravelling the unseen. In NeurIPS.
Alexander Pashevich, Cordelia Schmid, and Chen Sun.
2021. Episodic transformer for vision-and-language
navigation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pages 15942–15952.
Tzuf Paz-Argaman and Reut Tsarfaty. 2019.
Run
through the streets: A new dataset and baseline mod-
els for realistic urban navigation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.08970.
Yuankai Qi, Zizheng Pan, Yicong Hong, Ming-Hsuan
Yang, Anton van den Hengel, and Qi Wu. 2021.
The road to know-where: An object-and-room in-
formed sequential bert for indoor vision-language
navigation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pages 1655–1664.
Yuankai Qi, Zizheng Pan, Shengping Zhang, Anton
van den Hengel, and Qi Wu. 2020a.
Object-and-
action aware model for visual language navigation.
In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Pro-
ceedings, Part X 16, pages 303–317. Springer.
Yuankai Qi, Qi Wu, Peter Anderson, Xin Wang,
William Yang Wang, Chunhua Shen, and Anton
van den Hengel. 2020b. Reverie: Remote embod-
ied visual referring expression in real indoor environ-
ments. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners.
Sonia Raychaudhuri, Saim Wani, Shivansh Patel, Un-
nat Jain, and Angel Chang. 2021. Language-aligned
waypoint (law) supervision for vision-and-language
navigation in continuous environments. In Proceed-
ings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 4018–4028.


Homero Roman Roman, Yonatan Bisk, Jesse Thoma-
son, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Jianfeng Gao. 2020.
RMM: A recursive mental model for dialog naviga-
tion. In Findings of Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP Findings).
Raphael Schumann and Stefan Riezler. 2022. Analyz-
ing generalization of vision and language navigation
to unseen outdoor areas. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon,
Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. 2020. ALFRED:
A Benchmark for Interpreting Grounded Instruc-
tions for Everyday Tasks.
In The IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR).
Chan Hee Song, Jihyung Kil, Tai-Yu Pan, Brian M
Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su. 2022.
One
step at a time: Long-horizon vision-and-language
navigation
with
milestones.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2202.07028.
Shuran Song, Fisher Yu, Andy Zeng, Angel X Chang,
Manolis Savva, and Thomas Funkhouser. 2017. Se-
mantic scene completion from a single depth image.
CVPR.
Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan
Chen, Erik Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J. Engel,
Raul Mur-Artal, Carl Ren, Shobhit Verma, Anton
Clarkson, Mingfei Yan, Brian Budge, Yajie Yan, Xi-
aqing Pan, June Yon, Yuyang Zou, Kimberly Leon,
Nigel Carter, Jesus Briales, Tyler Gillingham, Elias
Mueggler, Luis Pesqueira, Manolis Savva, Dhruv
Batra, Hauke M. Strasdat, Renzo De Nardi, Michael
Goesele, Steven Lovegrove, and Richard New-
combe. 2019. The Replica dataset: A digital replica
of indoor spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797.
Alane Suhr, Claudia Yan, Jack Schluger, Stanley Yu,
Hadi Khader, Marwa Mouallem, Iris Zhang, and
Yoav Artzi. 2019.
Executing instructions in situ-
ated collaborative interactions.
In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 2119–2130, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Q. Sun, Y. Zhuang, Z. Chen, Y. Fu, and X. Xue.
2021.
Depth-guided adain and shift attention net-
work for vision-and-language navigation. In 2021
IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and
Expo (ICME), pages 1–6, Los Alamitos, CA, USA.
IEEE Computer Society.
Andrew Szot, Alex Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik
Wijmans, Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah Maestre,
Mustafa Mukadam, Devendra Chaplot, Oleksandr
Maksymets, Aaron Gokaslan, Vladimir Vondrus,
Sameer Dharur, Franziska Meier, Wojciech Galuba,
Angel Chang, Zsolt Kira, Vladlen Koltun, Jiten-
dra Malik, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra. 2021.
Habitat 2.0: Training home assistants to rearrange
their habitat. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14405.
Hao Tan, Licheng Yu, and Mohit Bansal. 2019. Learn-
ing to navigate unseen environments: Back transla-
tion with environmental dropout. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
and Short Papers), pages 2610–2621, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Sinan Tan, Mengmeng Ge, Di Guo, Huaping Liu, and
Fuchun Sun. 2022. Self-supervised 3d semantic rep-
resentation learning for vision-and-language naviga-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.10788.
Stefanie Tellex, Thomas Kollar, Steven Dickerson,
Matthew Walter, Ashis Banerjee, Seth Teller, and
Nicholas Roy. 2011.
Understanding natural lan-
guage commands for robotic navigation and mobile
manipulation. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence.
Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, and Yonatan Bisk.
2019a. Shifting the baseline: Single modality per-
formance on visual navigation & QA. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), pages 1977–1983, Min-
neapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jesse Thomason, Michael Murray, Maya Cakmak, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019b. Vision-and-dialog navi-
gation. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL).
Arun Balajee Vasudevan, Dengxin Dai, and Luc
Van Gool. 2021. Talk2nav: Long-range vision-and-
language navigation with dual attention and spatial
memory. International Journal of Computer Vision,
129(1):246–266.
Adam Vogel and Dan Jurafsky. 2010. Learning to fol-
low navigational directions. In Proceedings of the
48th annual meeting of the association for computa-
tional linguistics, pages 806–814.
Hanqing Wang, Wenguan Wang, Wei Liang, Caiming
Xiong, and Jianbing Shen. 2021. Structured scene
memory for vision-language navigation. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 8455–
8464.
Hanqing Wang, Wenguan Wang, Tianmin Shu, Wei
Liang, and Jianbing Shen. 2020a.
Active visual
information gathering for vision-language naviga-
tion. In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV).
Hu Wang, Qi Wu, and Chunhua Shen. 2020b. Soft ex-
pert reward learning for vision-and-language naviga-
tion. In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV’20).


Xin Wang, Qiuyuan Huang, Asli Celikyilmaz, Jian-
feng Gao, Dinghan Shen, Yuan-Fang Wang, William
Wang, and Lei Zhang. 2019.
Reinforced cross-
modal matching and self-supervised imitation learn-
ing for vision-language navigation. In Proceedings
of the CVF/IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, Long Beach, CA, USA.
CVF/IEEE.
Xin Wang, Qiuyuan Huang, Asli Celikyilmaz, Jian-
feng
Gao,
Dinghan
Shen,
Yuan-Fang
Wang,
William Yang Wang, and Lei Zhang. 2020c. Vision-
language navigation policy learning and adaptation.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 43(12):4205–4216.
Xin Wang, Wenhan Xiong, Hongmin Wang, and
William Yang Wang. 2018.
Look before you
leap: Bridging model-free and model-based rein-
forcement learning for planned-ahead vision-and-
language navigation. Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV 2018).
Xin Eric Wang, Vihan Jain, Eugene Ie, William Yang
Wang, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Sujith Ravi. 2020d.
Environment-agnostic multitask learning for natural
language grounded navigation. In European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision (ECCV’20).
Erik Wijmans, Samyak Datta, Oleksandr Maksymets,
Abhishek Das, Georgia Gkioxari, Stefan Lee, Irfan
Essa, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. 2019a. Embod-
ied Question Answering in Photorealistic Environ-
ments with Point Cloud Perception. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR).
Erik Wijmans, Abhishek Kadian, Ari Morcos, Stefan
Lee, Irfan Essa, Devi Parikh, Manolis Savva, and
Dhruv Batra. 2019b. Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect
pointgoal navigators from 2.5 billion frames.
In
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Yi Wu, Yuxin Wu, Georgia Gkioxari, and Yuandong
Tian. 2018. Building generalizable agents with a re-
alistic and rich 3d environment.
Fei Xia, Amir R. Zamir, Zhiyang He, Alexander Sax,
Jitendra Malik, and Silvio Savarese. 2018. Gibson
env: Real-world perception for embodied agents. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Qiaolin Xia, Xiujun Li, Chunyuan Li, Yonatan Bisk,
Zhifang Sui, Jianfeng Gao, Yejin Choi, and Noah A.
Smith. 2020.
Multi-view learning for vision-and-
language navigation.
Jiannan Xiang, Xin Wang, and William Yang Wang.
2020. Learning to stop: A simple yet effective ap-
proach to urban vision-language navigation. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2020, pages 699–707.
An Yan, Xin Eric Wang, Jiangtao Feng, Lei Li, and
William Yang Wang. 2020.
Cross-lingual vision-
language navigation.
Jiwen Zhang, Zhongyu Wei, Jianqing Fan, and Jiajie
Peng. 2021.
Curriculum learning for vision-and-
language navigation. In NeurIPS.
Weixia Zhang, Chao Ma, Qi Wu, and Xiaokang
Yang. 2020a. Language-guided navigation via cross-
modal grounding and alternate adversarial learn-
ing. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
Video Technology.
Yubo Zhang, Hao Tan, and Mohit Bansal. 2020b. Diag-
nosing the environment bias in vision-and-language
navigation.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, IJCAI-20, pages 890–897. International Joint
Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Organization.
Main track.
Ming Zhao, Peter Anderson, Vihan Jain, Su Wang,
Alexander Ku, Jason Baldridge, and Eugene Ie.
2021. On the evaluation of vision-and-language nav-
igation instructions. In Proceedings of the 16th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages
1302–1316.
Xinzhe Zhou,
Wei Liu,
and Yadong Mu. 2021.
Rethinking the spatial route prior in vision-and-
language navigation.
Fengda Zhu, Xiwen Liang, Yi Zhu, Qizhi Yu, Xiaojun
Chang, and Xiaodan Liang. 2021a. Soon: Scenario
oriented object navigation with graph-based explo-
ration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
12689–12699.
Fengda Zhu, Yi Zhu, Xiaojun Chang, and Xiaodan
Liang. 2020a. Vision-language navigation with self-
supervised auxiliary reasoning tasks.
In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Fengda Zhu, Yi Zhu, Vincent Lee, Xiaodan Liang, and
Xiaojun Chang. 2021b. Deep learning for embod-
ied vision navigation: A survey.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.04097.
Wang Zhu, Hexiang Hu, Jiacheng Chen, Zhiwei Deng,
Vihan Jain, Eugene Ie, and Fei Sha. 2020b. Baby-
Walk: Going farther in vision-and-language naviga-
tion by taking baby steps.
In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 2539–2556. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Wanrong Zhu, Yuankai Qi, Pradyumna Narayana, Ka-
zoo Sone, Sugato Basu, Xin Eric Wang, Qi Wu,
Miguel Eckstein, and William Yang Wang. 2021c.
Diagnosing vision-and-language navigation: What
really matters.


Wanrong Zhu, Xin Wang, Tsu-Jui Fu, An Yan,
Pradyumna Narayana, Kazoo Sone, Sugato Basu,
and William Yang Wang. 2021d. Multimodal text
style transfer for outdoor vision-and-language navi-
gation. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Main Volume, pages 1207–1221.
Yi Zhu, Yue Weng, Fengda Zhu, Xiaodan Liang,
Qixiang Ye, Yutong Lu, and Jianbin Jiao. 2021e.
Self-motivated communication agent for real-world
vision-dialog navigation.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), pages 1594–1603.
Yi Zhu, Fengda Zhu, Zhaohuan Zhan, Bingqian Lin,
Jianbin Jiao, Xiaojun Chang, and Xiaodan Liang.
2020c. Vision-dialog navigation by exploring cross-
modal memory. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, pages 10730–10739.
Yuke Zhu, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Eric Kolve, Joseph J
Lim, Abhinav Gupta, Li Fei-Fei, and Ali Farhadi.
2017.
Target-driven visual navigation in indoor
scenes using deep reinforcement learning. In 2017
IEEE international conference on robotics and au-
tomation (ICRA), pages 3357–3364. IEEE.


A
Dataset Details
Here in Table 2, we introduce more information
about the datasets. Compared with the number
of the datasets, the simulators are limited. More
speciﬁcally, most indoor datasets are based on Mat-
terport3D and most outdoor datasets are based on
Google Street View. Also, more datasets are about
indoor environments rather than outdoor environ-
ments. Outdoor environments are usually more
complex and contain more objects compared with
indoor environments.
B
Simulator
The virtual features of the dataset are deeply con-
nected with the simulator in which datasets are
built. Here we summarize simulators frequently
used during the VLN dataset creation process.
House3D (Wu et al., 2018) is a realistic virtual
3D environment built based on the SUNCG (Song
et al., 2017) dataset. An agent in the environment
has access to ﬁrst-person view RGB images, to-
gether with semantic/instance masks and depth in-
formation.
Matterport3D (Anderson et al., 2018b) simula-
tor is a large-scale visual reinforcement learning
simulation environment for research on embod-
ied AI based on the Matterport3D dataset (Chang
et al., 2017). Matterport3D contains various in-
door scenes, including houses, apartments, hotels,
ofﬁces, and churches. An agent can navigate be-
tween viewpoints along a pre-deﬁned graph. Most
indoors VLN datasets such as R2R and its variants
are based on the Matterport3D simulator.
Habitat (Manolis Savva* et al., 2019; Szot et al.,
2021) is a 3D simulation platform for training em-
bodied AI in 3D physics-enabled scenarios. Com-
pared with other simulation environments, Habitat
2.0 (Szot et al., 2021) shows strength in system
response speed. Habitat has the following datasets
built-in: Matterport3D (Chang et al., 2017), Gib-
son (Xia et al., 2018), and Replica (Straub et al.,
2019). AI2-THOR (Kolve et al., 2017) is a near
photo-realistic 3D indoor simulation environment,
where agents could navigate and interact with ob-
jects. Based on the object interaction function, it
helps to build a dataset that requires object interac-
tion, such as ALFRED (Shridhar et al., 2020).
Gibson (Xia et al., 2018) is a real-world percep-
tion interactive environment with complex seman-
tics. Each viewpoint has a set of RGB panoramas
with global camera poses and reconstructed 3D
meshes. Matterport3D dataset (Chang et al., 2017)
is also integrated into the Gibson simulator.
House3D (Wu et al., 2018) converts SUNCG’s
static environment into a virtual environment,
where the agent can navigate with physical con-
straints (e.g. it cannot pass through walls or ob-
jects).
LANI (Misra et al., 2018) is a 3D simulator built
in Unity3D platform. The environment in LANI is
a fenced, square, grass ﬁeld containing randomly
placed landmarks. An agent needs to navigate be-
tween landmarks following the natural language
instruction. Drone navigation tasks (Blukis et al.,
2018, 2019) are also built based on LANI.
Currently, most datasets and simulators focus
on indoors navigable scenes partly because of the
difﬁculty of building an outdoor photo-realistic 3D
simulator out of the increased complexity. Google
Street View 4, an online API that is integrated with
Google Maps, is composed of billions of realistic
street-level panoramas. It has been frequently used
to create outdoor VLN tasks since the development
of TOUCHDOWN (Chen et al., 2019).
C
Room-to-Room Leaderboard
Room-to-Room (R2R) (Anderson et al., 2018b)
is the benchmark used most frequently for evalu-
ating different methods. Here we collect all the
reported performance metrics in the corresponding
papers and the ofﬁcial R2R leaderboard5. Since
beam search explores more routes, and since prior
exploration has additional observations in the test
environment, their performance can not be directly
compared with other methods.
4https://developers.google.com/maps/
documentation/streetview/overview
5https://eval.ai/web/challenges/
challenge-page/97/leaderboard/270


Name
Simulator
Language-Active
Environment
Room-to-Room (Anderson et al., 2018b)
Matterport3D

Indoor
Room-for-Room (Jain et al., 2019)
Matterport3D

Indoor
Room-Across-Room (Ku et al., 2020)
Matterport3D

Indoor
Landmark-RxR (He et al., 2021)
Matterport3D

Indoor
XL-R2R (Yan et al., 2020)
Matterport3D

Indoor
VLNCE (Krantz et al., 2020)
Habitat

Indoor
StreetLearn (Mirowski et al., 2019)
Google Street View

Outdoor
StreetNav (Hermann et al., 2020)
Google Street View

Outdoor
TOUCHDOWN (Chen et al., 2019)
Google Street View

Outdoor
Talk2Nav (Vasudevan et al., 2021)
Google Street View

Outdoor
LANI (Misra et al., 2018)
-

Outdoor
RoomNav (Wu et al., 2018)
House3D

Indoor
EmbodiedQA (Das et al., 2018)
House3D

Indoor
REVERIE (Qi et al., 2020b)
Matterport3D

Indoor
SOON (Zhu et al., 2021a)
Matterport3D

Indoor
IQA (Gordon et al., 2018)
AI2-THOR

Indoor
CHAI (Misra et al., 2018)
CHALET

Indoor
ALFRED (Shridhar et al., 2020)
AI2-THOR

Indoor
VNLA (Nguyen et al., 2019)
Matterport3D

Indoor
HANNA (Nguyen and Daumé III, 2019)
Matterport3D

Indoor
CEREALBAR (Suhr et al., 2019)
-

Indoor
Just Ask (Chi et al., 2020)
Matterport3D

Indoor
CVDN (Thomason et al., 2019b)
Matterport3D

Indoor
RobotSlang (Banerjee et al., 2020)
-

Indoor
Talk the Walk (de Vries et al., 2018)
-

Outdoor
MC Collab (Narayan-Chen et al., 2019)
Minecraft

Outdoor
TEACh (Padmakumar et al., 2021)
AI2-THOR

Indoor
DialFRED (Gao et al., 2022)
AI2-THOR

Indoor
Table 2: Vision-and-Language Navigation datasets. Language-Active means the agent needs to use natural lan-
guage to request help, including both Guidance datasets and Dialog datasets in Table 1.
Simulator
Photo-realistic
3D
House3D (Wu et al., 2018)


Matterport3D (Chang et al., 2017)


Habitat (Manolis Savva* et al., 2019)


AI2-THOR (Kolve et al., 2017)


Gibson (Xia et al., 2018)


LANI (Misra et al., 2018)


*Google Street View


Table 3: Common simulators used to build VLN datasets. *Google Street View is online API, providing similar
functionality as a simulator for building VLN datasets.


Leader-Board (Test Unseen)
Single Run
Prior Exploration
Beam Search
Models
TL↓
NE↓
OSR↑
SR↑
SPL↑
TL↓
NE↓
OSR↑
SR↑
SPL↑
TL↓
NE↓
OSR↑
SR↑
SPL↑
Random
9.89
9.79
0.18
0.13
0.12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Human
11.85
1.61
0.90
0.86
0.76
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Seq-to-Seq (Anderson et al., 2018b)
8.13
20.4
0.27
0.20
0.18
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
RPA (Wang et al., 2018)
9.15
7.53
0.32
0.25
0.23
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Speaker-Follower (Fried et al., 2018)
14.82
6.62
0.44
0.35
0.28
-
-
-
-
-
1257.38
4.87
0.96
0.54
0.01
Chasing Ghosts (Anderson et al., 2019a)
10.03
7.83
0.42
0.33
0.30
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Self-Monitoring (Ma et al., 2019a)
18.04
5.67
0.59
0.48
0.35
-
-
-
-
-
373.1
4.48
0.97
0.61
0.02
RCM !(Wang et al., 2019)
11.97
6.12
0.50
0.43
0.38
9.48
4.21
0.67
0.60
0.59
357.6
4.03
0.96
0.63
0.02
Regretful Agent (Ma et al., 2019b)
13.69
5.69
0.56
0.48
0.40
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
FAST (Ke et al., 2019)
22.08
5.14
0.64
0.54
0.41
-
-
-
-
-
196.5
4.29
0.90
0.61
0.03
ALTR (Huang et al., 2019b)
10.27
5.49
0.56
0.48
0.45
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
EnvDrop (Tan et al., 2019)
11.66
5.23
0.59
0.51
0.47
9.79
3.97
0.70
0.64
0.61
686.8
3.26
0.99
0.69
0.01
PRESS (Li et al., 2019)
10.52
4.53
0.63
0.57
0.53
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PTA (Landi et al., 2020)
10.17
6.17
0.47
0.40
0.36
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
EGP (Deng et al., 2020)
-
5.34
0.61
0.53
0.42
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
SERL (Wang et al., 2020b)
12.13
5.63
0.61
0.53
0.49
-
-
-
-
-
690.61
3.21
0.99
0.70
0.01
OAAM (Qi et al., 2020a)
10.40
-
0.61
0.53
0.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
CMG-AAL (Zhang et al., 2020a)
12.07
3.41
0.76
0.67
0.60
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
AuxRN (Zhu et al., 2020a)
-
5.15
0.62
0.55
0.51
10.43
3.69
0.75
0.68
0.65
40.85
3.24
0.81
0.71
0.21
RelGraph (Hong et al., 2020a)
10.29
4.75
0.61
0.55
0.52
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
PRRVALENT (Hao et al., 2020)
10.51
5.30
0.61
0.54
0.51
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Active Exploration (Wang et al., 2020a)
21.03
4.34
0.71
0.60
0.43
9.85
3.30
0.77
0.70
0.68
176.2
3.07
0.94
0.70
0.05
VLN-BERT (Majumdar et al., 2020)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
686.62
3.09
0.99
0.73
0.01
DASA (Sun et al., 2021)
10.06
5.11
-
0.54
0.52
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
ORIST (Qi et al., 2021)
11.31
5.10
-
0.57
0.52
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
NvEM (An et al., 2021)
12.98
4.37
0.66
0.58
0.54
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
SSM (Wang et al., 2021)
20.39
4.57
0.70
0.61
0.46
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Recurrent VLN BERT (Hong et al., 2021)
12.35
4.09
0.70
0.63
0.57
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
SOAT (Moudgil et al., 2021)
12.26
-
4.49
58
53
REM (Liu et al., 2021)
13.11
3.87
0.72
0.65
0.59
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
HAMT(Chen et al., 2021b)
12.27
3.93
0.72
0.65
0.60
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Spatial Route Prior (Zhou et al., 2021)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
625.27
3.55
0.99
0.74
0.01
Airbert (Guhur et al., 2021)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
686.54
2.58
0.99
0.78
0.01
3DSR (Tan et al., 2022)
15.89
3.73
0.73
0.66
0.60
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Table 4: Leaderboard of Room-to-Room benchmark as of March, 2022
